The Lightshy Crow
Book One of the Scarab Cycle
John R Raymond
/Did gods say let there be darkness?/
Shall I close my eyes and remember? Remember standing on the balcony outside my room? And see how my vision came to pass! How my uncle ignored my warnings and brought down his fire and ice—and sowed the gods’ own wrath. Shall I close my eyes and see the flames? How I see them rage. And how I see my city crumble and fall into the sea? Oh Deleset? How long must I weep your broken towers, now lost to the eastern sea?
—From The Fall of Delaset by Farseer Illidus Terrikon, the last great son of the House of the Fey Serpent, circa 15 AC.

































Copyright © The Darklight Group. All rights reserved. 2020-2022. [?]


Chapter 1: Let There Be Light
	Only stories, told in song, live forever.
		—From The Living Book of the Dead

The sun had long since set in the hours since leaving the Clivents’ farmstead. Shadows now hung in the air above the ledge separating Gaz from his bed. Ghosts were said to inhabit such cracks in the Worldegg. Now in the dark, Gaz was too afraid to disbelieve. “Luckily, I been smart,” he muttered to himself. He had used the last of his coin to buy a whiff of tarsk to keep him company on the way home. Uncorking the bottle cradled in his left arm, he took a quick sip. “Hah!” he said as he slammed the cork back down the throat of the jug. Emboldened, he took a quick step forward.
A shadow loomed up in front of him, and he clutched the jug to his chest with both arms. “Ah!”
“I see you, Gaz,” the shadow said.
Gaz stepped backwards squeezing the bottle. “Wh-who is it?”
The creature resolved into Rennly Rickot. “Don’t you recognize me?”
“Rennly?” Gaz said. The moon had blinded him a second. “You’re back? And you are like… You. The moon really sells it… I guess!” Gaz said, stepping forward, pushing his jug of tarsk towards Rennly’s dark outline.
“I’m not here for visiting either,” Rennly said.
He seemed stiffer now, yet the same Rennly as ever. “I heard you were a censor now,” Gaz said. He struggled not to slur his words. “And I know I have to do better when there are others, but look at you--...all in black.” Gaz wanted to be proud but Rennly wasn’t really  his friend, was he? “Why are you here?” Gaz added. “It’s the middle of nowhere.”
“To tidy up some loose ends,” Rennly said as he finally relaxed his stance. 
A spotted Orioles hand Gaz knew too well reached for the jug he held out, but Gaz snatched it back. “Let me--...get the cork.” He popped the top and took another quick slug himself. “Look at me, drinking with a censor.” He handed the jug to Rennly. “Who would have thought it?”
Rennly sniffed the lip of the jug. 
“What loose ends?” Gaz asked, remembering Rennly wasn’t here to steal his tarsk.
“Remember that time about Tomrin?” Rennly said slowly.
Gaz knew the time. “You still want to kill him?” Gaz said, after a moment’s hesitation.
Rennly’s green eyes glinted like dark flint. “I didn’t say that.”
“Whatever you say,” Gaz said, using his small voice. “I never told him. I never said anything, to no one.”
“The plan is to destroy him.”
“I forgot.” Gaz said. Even on tarks he kept everyone’s secret because he couldn’t remember to blab them. Tomrin’s own secret he’d learned at the end of last year’s fair. It was a real doozy. “But…” He let his question trail off. How could Rennly know when not even Tomrin knew nothing of his own knowing? But then Gaz saw it in Rennly’s eyes. He saw why he’d come. You’re the loose end, a deadly serious little voice whispered in his head. Then like a dream, Rennly reached down and wrapped his spotted Orioles fingers around the rod at his waist and unhooked his nightstick. “Just as I destroy you now,” he said as he raised the weapon over his head.
Gaz backed away. “I—” A stray rock caught a heel and he tried to catch himself on the ledge but he careened over the side. “Ahhh!”
The night went black. 
Coiled on a Branch [?]
Rennly frowned at the jug in his hand.
“Why? Because I never really liked you, Gaz. And I never liked the fact that you have our father’s eyes.” He tossed the jug over the side, splattering tarks on the rocks below. “There can be no doubt. I should be the Ocrin great son. The family fortunes should go to me, not to useless slaves. Now, that would be a crime,” he added to himself as he made the sign of the tree. “One against the gods and against men.”
The night’s work done, Censor Rickot headed back home to Menad.
Chapter 2: Infernal Hooks
	I too wish to go to heaven.
		—From The Book of Light 

The phoenix has had a thousand names spoken in a million tongues across the protracted ages. Letting her core halt but a moment, she cut the current age short as she verged on nova. Her surface cracked and streamers of pure light escaped from deep within. Then around the molten rents, fiery loops tore free and flared out. But her greatest loops erupted and sped off in all directions.
The light, like wide earth below, was green in apprehension.
Ribbons of it whipped past Serathus, Gearthrum’s moon and sliced into the high atmosphere above the Empire of Corundum. Unlike the other starlight from the sun, this light was subtle, and ray-upon-ray struck the earth unnoticed.
A small glinting, however, pierced the airy dome above Menad, a small backwater town of the empire. The light quavered gently down through the hot air to an unassuming, two-story home.
Entering a pane of glass, the light bent virtually undetected then bent again and exited the pane on the other side before entering a small rented room—a repurposed attic bedroom. In less time than a bug’s blink, the light stabbed through the air and struck Tomrin Ocrin on the chest. A ring of metallic scales growing over his heart lit up. Instead of glinting or fracturing like a bit of glass, the scales gleamed. For a second, Tomrin froze, deathly still, his shirt held lank in his hand. His breath caught in his mouth. His mind emptied in shock, and refilled in horror. Anyone looking up from the street below could easily see him glowing unnaturally.
He slapped the shirt over his heart and covered the scales on his chest. Turning his head he glanced out the window. Menad darkened and brightened both as the whole of the city came into focus in an instant. “Ugh!” Every muscle in him hummed. His heart thudded in his ears as they strained to hear every sound. “Just what you need: more feathered trouble,” he breathed.
Menad [?]
Tomrin pulled his shirt over his head as the tall white temple at the center of town accused him of living an untruth.
The scales were a problem he still needed to solve, but from his covert studies Tomrin learned they were once called the Mark of the Chosen. Now, the gift was a curse. Any man so marked was to turn himself over to the Censors or to the Daughters of Heaven’s Glory for Purification. As far as Tomrin could make out, Purification was painful, likely fatal. Dying was a fate he sorely wished to avoid with his current disobedience. And despite what The Book of Light said about the subordinate races, he wasn’t that corrupt to deserve death yet. His shirt safely on, he bit a nail as he glanced back out the window.
Nothing, then suddenly, a solitary face turned and looked up at him from the street below. Tomrin recognized the greedy green eyes and face. They belonged to Gaz, his old childhood friend. Stunted ears poked through the greasy mat of hair on his head. Wearing his rough leather jerkin, Gaz looked every bit the Orish slave he was. He squinted up at Tomrin. Work had cut lines in his old friend’s sun baked face. The boy shook his head and abruptly turned and disappeared from view without a second glance. 
Tomrin ripped his gaze from the window and his breathing came deep and rapid. How much had Gaz seen? Had he glanced up before? Had he witnessed the green glow, and seen the scales? When Tomrin dared another glance out the window, Gaz was gone and safe old Menad had returned.
Yet stark green eyes stared back from the window.
A Peregrine [?]
He thought to rush outside and track down Gaz as he quickly tucked in his shirt. Then could ask, obliquely of course, what his old friend knew—and what he’d seen. “So what are you doing in Menad, Gaz?” Tomrin said to himself as if asking Gaz. What Gaz might say to a Censor, Tomrin didn’t want to know. Luckily no one believed a slave. A green glow? There was not much a Censor could make from that, especially if there was no gold in it for them. With any luck, that was.
Rubbing his clammy hands on his shirt, he took a moment to rub the wound on his chest where his scales regrew around an angry button of flesh. Burning the Mark off was better—less painful than cutting—but the burn still itched to the seventh heaven while healing. And yet again, he had waited too long to burn the scales off. Work! He needed to get to work. 
He could solve his problems with gold. Even holy creatures could be bribed for a price, though Tomrin suspected the Daughters of Heaven’s Glory might take umbrage at the thought they too could be so easily purchased.
Tomrin Ocrin [?]
Floorboards squeaked outside his room; there was movement in the hallway.
Tomrin spun around. Just Mistress Carl, he told himself as he tried to calm his jitters. He hadn’t heard her come up the steps, but now his landlady’s heavy footsteps tracked past his room and down the hallway before dying out at the stairs. Those, the heavyset woman took cautiously. 
Cinching his belt, Tomrin wondered if he was getting fat. You are clearly getting sloppy, a nasty voice in his head chided. He swore at the voice as he shook his head at his shirt. Feathers. Going forward I’m going to keep you on, he promised. Even while sleeping, in case I wake groggy, and stupid again.
He grimaced at his own savagery and bloused his shirt.
Despite his efforts, the shirt remained wrinkled. The tan color also did not hide all the grime of work. His last pair of pants, likewise. Running his hand through his hair he pushed his dark, oily locks back. That would have to do. “You look good enough,” he told himself, but he felt like himself, a man going to a funeral, his own.
Ben [?]
Outside his room, the hallway smelled of maple bars and pastries frying; Mistress Carl cooked for him, for herself, and for her ladies meetings.
For those meetings she cooked each day and stacked the pantry full—more than full. Today was maple bars. The idea made Tomrin want to laugh. Why am I getting pudgy again? No mystery there. A dull hunger gnawed his belly, but the thought of Gaz speaking with a Censor killed his appetite.
If Gaz spoke to a Daughter of Heaven’s Glory this was the first place they’d search. 
Tracking down the spiral steps with a sinking heart, Tomrin pondered the green light.
Ben, Mistress Carl’s cat, sat on the banister on the landing. He turned and Tomrin ran a hand through his light gray belly fur. He purred and tried to pull Tomrin’s hand back down when he tried to pull away. “Sorry, little guy,” Tomrin told him. “I can’t pick you up. Gotta get to work.” [?]
Tomrin stepped off the landing. If he’d headed out the door quickly, he might make it before Mistress Carl poked her head out the kitchen way, then he could leave before she realized he was gone.
It was a good and solid plan.
Chapter 3: A Disgrace to His Race
	“... and is free to disregard any master who does not sit upon the Crystal Throne itself.”
		--From the Slave Tax, Lot 25

“Look at you,” Mistress Carl said, stepping out of the kitchen, forcing Tomrin to stop. “Late for work again. I can’t see how you pay the rent. Not this way.”
“I had trouble sleeping,” Tomrin said. He paid for the room, yet his landlady Mistress Carl acted like a greedy aunt who needed his every penny. Why? To give to needy children? No. Or to the poor?  No, to give to the Daughters of Heaven’s Glory--like they needed more. And the more he let on, the more she taxed him.
“Oh? You had trouble sleeping?” she said, raising her eyebrows at him. “You woke me with your late comings and goings last night again.”
“I’m sorry, I-it’s just that last night—” Tomrin had a lie prepared, but she was faster than him this morning.
“And you woke me again in the middle with your screaming.” She wiped her fleshy Rubish hands on her apron. “Who says that kind of stuff anyway?” 
“Screaming?” Tomrin said.
“And banging. I can’t have that. I can’t have any of that, Master Tomrin. If the ladies in my ladies meeting heard half the stuff… No, I’m afraid I’m sorry, Master Tomrin. I’ve made a decision. You can only stay week to week from now on.”
“Week to week?” Tomrin said. “That is nearly twice as much money.”
“Move out if you have to—and the gods help whoever rents to you, carrying on late into the night like you do.” 
“I don’t have that kind of money.” The lie came easy.
“Money isn’t the issue. It sounded like you were trying to raise the dead.”
The Book of Light [?]
Tomrin glanced from Mistress Carl to the painting of Seasargus on the wall above her living room couch. 
Money is always an issue with women like you, Tomrin thought, but a dream had brought him awake the night before. He reached up to scratch his chest, but caught himself. “I was trying to sleep,” he said, his eyes still on the painting. The high god’s orange eyes stared down disapprovingly.
“You were summoning demons. The stuff you were yelling...”
“Hmm,” Tomrin mused, not wanting to remember. 
He studied The Book of Light on the coffee table. The red bookmark lay across the open page, the book’s midpoint, a different place than the night before. Mistress Carl had also moved the green tassel to the beginning, and the blue to near the end. Tomrin knew well the two passages the ribbons likely marked. One referenced men marked by demons, the the treatment of slave men you did not own. And in the middle, the book spoke of a manbeast whom the Peregrine from the far south called the Lightshy Crow. 
Across a painted rendition of a man twisted with the animals, the red tassel firmly lay.
A Dream [?]
Tomrin blinked. 
The dream from the night before replayed itself in his mind. 
The pain was one thing, but watching his body blacken as he was chopped to bits was quite another. The pieces of him then pulled away and the charcoaled shards arranged themselves seemingly at random under a force, chinking together. Cheeng, cheeng, cheeng. The shards stacked, growing into the likeness of a tall bird. The great crow burned on a crooked crossbar held up by a wooden pole alight. Cheeng. 
Then everything was silent. The wooden pole, though burning, held the crow deathly still. 
Haloed by a burning circle of wood, the burning crossbar pinioned open the glass crow’s wings. Its beak hung open and its lifeless head stood stiff, looking up and off and to the right—to the open sky, all white. The bird wasn’t real and it wasn’t alive, and the field it guarded stretched out in harrowed rows of black dirt, all barren to the pale horizon.
Suddenly, the crow’s eyes opened and glowed red. Then turning its head, it shouted. “I am the Lightshy Crow!” That was when Tomrin came awake screaming, his hands numb and his body covered in sweat. He was unsure then whether he’d screamed those words aloud. Now, under Mistress Carl’s disapproving gaze, he surmised he may well have. He sucked in a breath and let it out, saying not a word.
Mistress Carl scowled at him. “You have until next week for this week’s and next’s. Or I want you gone.” 
Tomrin stepped around her and, reaching the door, opened it. “I’m busy. I told you that when I moved in.” He stepped out into the morning sun. 
“You wouldn’t be in such a hurry if you went to bed at a decent hour. That’s half the reason I can’t have you here anymore.” Mistress Carl said as he closed the door. Her muffled voice came through its wooden slats. “I swear the demons have their hooks in you, boy.” 
Tomrin angrily scanned the street. I’m not the feathered Lightshy Crow! It was just a nightmare.  He certainly didn’t want to move, just because of it. 
The idea of having to find a new place put a pressure in his skull.
In the Light Air [?]
The Gods Have Plenty of Gold, an overnight tract left on the porch read.
Tomrin eye’s flittered over it as he headed down the steps. Out in the street, he found himself alternately scanning the way ahead as he trudged along. Mistress Carl would burn the tract left on her porch, but then again maybe she was not all that she seemed. Tomrin tried to laugh at the idea of Mistress Carl being a Sister of the Dark. 
As he walked, an eerie feeling grew in the back of his mind as it buzzed in the fore.
Last night was the first time in years he had raised the covers over his head to ward off the dark. 
Now, he thrust down memories of his life in Woolad and tried to quash a feeling of being watched. Just my imagination, he told himself. The Lightshy Crow was a fairytale cooked up by his mother’s race. Only fools worried the Lightshy Crow walked among them. 
Because if he did, there was no hope left.
A Golden Feather [?]
An Orioles man in black silks and a golden feather badge on his chest, stepped into the street ahead.
The man was like another boy Tomrin had grown up with in Woolad and looked just like Rennly Rickot, his jaw flat and concocted of granite. Orioles each had their own skin grain which never changed. But Rennly a censor? That made no sense. Rennly couldn’t be a censor but his grain had not changed. 
Tomrin slipped off the road into the alleyway just before the corner of Chestnut Avenue and the Eastern Highway. Rennly clenched his jaw tight and hurried up Chestnut, then turned down at the corner. Tomrin tried to act natural as he waited, resisting the urge to touch the itching flesh on his chest. Couldn’t have been Rennly. 
“Jarvis weak on Zircos,” a nearby Rubish man said to a woman on the street.
“No,” the woman said, bumping into Tomrin as she stepped into the alleyway herself and walking on. The man followed into the alley with a stack of papers in his hands. “Jarvis weak on Zircos,” the man said, but now pushing his pamphlet on Tomrin. 
“No. No, thanks,” Tomrin said, trying to smile away a grimace. The tract was standard warmongering, and he had no time for it, having read it once before, and disagreeing with every point.
“The Orioles are sneaking across our borders,” the man said, still pushing his tract. “The emperor needs to do something.” 
“Fine, I’ll take one,” Tomrin said to shut the man up.
Holding it up, he pretended to read it. The man walked off. 
Tomrin waited several moments then scratched his chest with the tract, dropped it thoroughly unread in the corner bin. 
Out onto the street, as if this was his normal, everyday path to work, he glanced in the direction of the glassworks in the valley on Arcade Avenue, trying to see if Rennly walked that way, but at this angle only Goodly Glasswork’s smokestacks leaking their wavy heat into the dusty air were visible.
A Feathered Fire [?]
Feathered Rennly! Tomrin thought as he headed down the avenue to Third Street, feeling foolish. 
The Orioles censor hadn’t even seen him, and the man hadn’t come this way but walked the other. 
Rennly’s father had died in a fire in Woolad, the same one that destroyed the Ocrin carpentry shop. Tomrin knew it was a tragic waste now, but he had said things to Rennly at the time, things he now regretted. Feathered feathers! Tomrin swore, trying to force the memories back down. 
Rennly had been too afraid to enter the flaming building to save his own father. The smoke was too much for Tomrin ultimately, and he had left Davit dying unconscious on the floor of the shop’s main room. Tomrin had hated Rennly, and called him a coward, but Rennly was no coward from a fight after that.
Chapter 4: The Scarab
	Yes. There is a word for that, just as there is a word for every tool in every workman’s toolkit, and yes, there is a new one for how he uses that word on every random puzzle he encounters.
		—From The Living Book of the Dead

Outside the glass shop, Non stood staring up at the Seasargus worked in glass in the window, an effigy to the Great Gods of the Sky, cut with Seasargus sparkling, his primordial wings arrayed out, open in esoteric glory somehow almost filling the whole front window as the morning’s sun glinted off the patchwork of red and black and blue. The idea of destroying the window flashed through Tomrin’s mind. But what to replace it with? Only the image of the solitary black bird burning in his mind came to the fore. Blinking away the thought, he stepped off the street and onto the walkway. “What’s going on?” he asked Non. “Shouldn’t you be working?”
The boy stepped over to the door. “A Censor came by looking for you and Robles. They tossed me out.” Non put his hand on the door’s handle, but did not open it. 
Tomrin ignored the churning in his stomach and tried to act casual. “A Censor? Here for me?” He let his eyes peel off Non to the gray glass door. The cuts had been arranged by Master Laz. The worldtree on Serathus above was done double-height and massive for a work of glass.
Non seemed part of the tree’s base. “The Censor left,” he said. “But what I can’t figure out is why he wanted to see you.”
“Why wouldn’t he want to see me?” Tomrin asked. “And shouldn’t you be working?”
“Should,” Non replied, sounding more dour than usual.
“Then why are we standing out here?”
“You think we can make the Scarab work?” Non asked, not answering.
The Scarab was Master Lazoloth’s big idea. When Tomrin joined the glass shop, the compound opera-glasses Master Laz had devised were but bits of glass laid out on a bench. Tomrin recently turned the mess into an almost-working prototype. Now the Scarab, as they called it, was Tomrin’s project more than Lazoloth’s. 
“Of course I can. What kind of question is that?”
“I was thinking about quitting and heading north,” Non replied. 
“To Corundum? I thought you hated Corundum?” Tomrin said. The idea of anyone quitting now though twisted his stomach.
“Not to Corundum. The Adamant,” Non said. “I’ve been thinking. And talking.”
“And talking?”
“And reading.” Non raised a finger. “They pay the free Peregrine from Corundum up there well. We’re novelties. Free slaves." 
“Novelties? Come on, let’s go inside,” Tomrin said. Despite the shop’s current financial troubles, no one could ever want for a better place to work than here. “There will be time enough to go to the Adamant and be curios when we’re filthy rich.”
“That would be fine too,” Non said. “Then you really think you can make the Scarab work?”
“Why are you asking?” Tomrin asked. “And not opening the door? You are always a pest, but today… Really, Non?”
 Finally, the boy turned to the door and opened it wide to the shop. “The Scarab’s all broken,” he said loudly for him, and for the gods, and for all the shop to hear.
“The Scarab is perfect,” Tomrin replied, lying smoothly. 
In a week the shop needed to demonstrate the strange handheld telescope to the Sapphire Front. Master Laz was the master of promises, and it had in the years since joining the shop fell to Tomrin to deliver.
“Perfect?” Non asked skeptically. 
“Don’t worry,” Tomrin said. “And the Censor was probably here just for glass for the temple.”
“Ah! There you are, Tomrin!—but no such luck,” was the first thing out of his friend Robles’s mouth.
Godly Glassworks [?]
The door closed and sealed street sounds out while locking the drowsy hum of torches in. A welcoming scent of pines hung in the air like incense.With its high doors and ceilings, the glass shop was a temple indeed, Tomrin’s. Here, he was a high priest, and he glanced at the old ratty chair belonging to the back blocking his way. Non stepped around the chair, but Tomrin paused next to it. Fifteen feet away, Robles stood, his back to the inner door. Hidden behind him, the furnace minders made the shop’s colored glass, unlike Robles who stood idle with his knife held high in his hand while Tiff and Ken worked their respective flames.
Despite being Orioles, Robles was Tomrin’s oldest friend, and yet his eyes and face were impossible to read. Tomrin didn’t even want to guess what Robles was up to now.
Dancing Bears [?]
Robles whipped his wrist. The knife sailed through the air, spinning. Tomrin started. “Ah!” The point stuck into the chair’s wooden back. Chenh! Tomrin swore. “What the feathers, Robles? You almost hit me!” 
Robles grinned; he was just messing around. “Not even close,” he said. “Nice of you to actually show up to work, though. Now grab my little doggy, Ang, for me,” he added, making grasping motions with his hands.
Tomrin glanced down at the knife. A doghead grinned up at him from the carved bone pommel. Levering the knife point free of the chair, he walked it over to Robles. “I see you are hard at work yourself,” Tomrin said as he slapped the knife into his friend’s open hand. 
“That I am,” Robles said in his most agreeable voice. “Can’t win the knife throw at the fair if I don’t practice.” 
Tomrin shook his head. “You could have waited until I was out of the way.” 
Robles slipped the knife into the leather holster at his side until a grinning white dog peeked free. “I could have, but then you wouldn’t have been able to save me the trip. Plus, sadly there was not much else I could do until you got here.” 
Robles’s words rang ominously. 
“Non said a Censor came for you and me,” Tomrin said into void.
“He didn’t find you?” 
“No.” 
“Well, that’s too bad. I might have given our old friend Rennly bad directions to your place. I know how much you love him.” 
“Rennly? I thought I saw him… He really is a Censor now then?” Tomrin said, shaking his head. 
“That he is.” Robles patted the head of his knife and walked over to his workstation along the back wall, hidden away in the darkest corner. “He insisted. He wanted to deliver the news himself.” 
Tomrin followed his friend. “The news that he is a Censor?” 
“No, not that.” From his cluttered workbench, Robles picked up an envelope. Tomrin had seen the look of it before, a letter from Robles’s aunt living in Woolad. “You know,” Robles said, holding the letter to his chin. “You should join me in the double’s throw. I bet I could win both that way.”
Flaming Bears [?]
“I’m not going to Sheep Shearing Days this year. Just tell me the news.” 
“Oh, you’re going home. Read it. You’ll see why.” Robles held out the envelope to Tomrin. “It’s about Gaz.”
Tomrin stared at the cream-colored envelope. “Gaz? What about him? I just saw him this morning.” 
Robles scowled. “I’m pretty sure you didn’t.” 
Sometimes Tomrin swore his friend was a master of the obtuse. “What do you mean?” 
“Just listen. I’ll read it for you.” Robles opened the envelope and pulled out a small sheet of thin yellow paper and unfolded it. “I saved this one because I knew you would want to read it, to hear what Aunty had to say directly.”
“Your aunt wrote to you about Gaz?” Tomrin asked. The woman who Robles called his aunt wasn’t his real aunt but his adoptive mother. Tomrin thought her a busybody, always sticking her nose into other people’s business. But she knew what was going on in Woolad, and the disparate parts of the world—or claimed to—and she had an opinion on all of them.
“I said listen.” Robles said, gone solemn. “There is some preamble.” 
Tomrin swore under his breath. “Feathers, fine. Read it already.” 
Robles glanced up from the letter. “Calm down. I am.” He cleared his throat. 
The dear gods in heaven, Tomrin thought. His friend loved his own theatrics too much. “I am calm.” 
“Dear Robles,” his friend started. “Your uncle’s second cousin-once-removed, Ebus, you remember him, the roof-man. His mother’s joints are loving this weather, the poor woman.” 
Tomrin groaned.
Robles stopped reading and looked up. “Old Ebus fixed my auntie’s roof.” 
“I’m glad for her...and for him,” Tomrin said. “But what about Gaz?”
“I’m coming to that,” Robles said, continuing to read. “Well, regardless of what the real demons are up to with this weather, your grandfather’s brother’s youngest, Babbs, wrote to me.” Robles had clearly skipped well ahead of the roof-fixing to the doings of distant cousins. To hear the woman go on, Tomrin swore Cordelia thought herself and Robles nobility, related to all the families of note throughout the world. “The slave trouble in Zircos is getting out of hand. Ha! Ha! Ha!” Robles looked up. “She wrote that.” He flipped the letter at Tomrin, only long enough for him to see that a flowing script in blue ink filled the fine yellow paper. 
“Gaz?” Tomrin demanded, losing patience.
“This is it. I’m coming to it,” Robles said. “Slaves and censors are running east, tracking slaves like headless chickens. Freed slaves in the east are getting caught up in it. But I’m afraid your friend Gaz has no more earthly worry of that. The gods took him to the second heaven yesterday. Seems he stumbled off a cliff and fell. His poor mother. She--” 
“No, no… No. I saw Gaz this morning. I swear I did.” Tomrin turned and thumbed the spines of  books on the bookself along the back wall. “I don’t believe this. Gaz can’t be dead.” He turned around and studied Robles. His friend didn’t look to be joking. 
“I don’t think my aunt would lie about it. You are not saying that, are you?” Robles asked.
“No. Of course not. It’s just… I swear, he walked down my street.” 
“But, did you talk to him?” 
“No. But I did see him through the dormir.” 
“Maybe it was someone else?” offered Non, turning from his own work area on the middle bench. The boy lost focus easily and when Tomrin and Robles talked he always needed to add his two pennies worth.
His butting in now irked. “You don’t know what I saw, Non. Maybe it wasn’t Gaz. But, feathers, it looked like him!”
“Settle down, settle down, Tomrin,” Robles said. “You hardly say a word to him.” 
“I know,” Tomrin said, calming himself. He and Gaz had been close once, but not anymore. “Once, we were better friends; you were the outsider.” 
“Things change. At least you haven’t gone completely daft. Not yet,” Robles said. “I almost believe you saw Rennly—as you say.” 
“Unless you believe in ghosts,” Non added. 
Tomrin ran his hand through his hair and sighed. “I feel like the world has gone crazy, but I am not Marvin. I don’t believe in ghosts.” 
“You see now why we have to go home tomorrow?” Robles said as he eyed Tormin suspiciously. “Gaz’s service is in the morning, then his spirit will be at rest.” 
“I’m not saying I saw a ghost. I’m sure that stuff only happens in stories.” 
“From the sound of it, your aunt is right; Gaz is the lucky one,” Non said as Robles folded the letter and placed the sheet back in it’s yellow envelope. “It’s those poor devils with the Mark I worry about, and with Censors running amok we Peregrine are going to be harassed day and night. Take off your shirt!” Non added in a commanding voice as if he were a Censor himself. He proceeded to take off his shirt, pulling it off over his head without unbuttoning first. His ribs stood out. Obvious from a glance—no scales grew on his chest. 
“Non, put…put your shirt back on,” Tomrin told him. 
“Non could be right,” Robles said as he opened the valves to his torch. 
“It makes sense,” Non said as pulled his shirt back over his head.
“No, it doesn’t,” Tomrin said. 
“Don’t you see it? This is how a new census can start,” Non insisted. 
“Because of a slave uprising in Zircos?” Tomrin said. “That’s a stretch.” 
“It’s always the slaves first,” Non replied. “I’m telling you. Same thing happened in what? Four-oh-one? In the Adamant under Colagon.” 
“You’ve been reading too many tracts, Non,” Tomrin said. “He was called Colagon the Mad...and how many years ago was that? That was like two hundred and um...” 
Non interrupted Tomrin’s mental math. “He was only called Colagon the Mad because he thought to disregard the Serath.”
Robles opened the gas valve to his torch.
“No. It was because...” Tomrin let his words trail off and stared at Robles’s hissing torch.
It was unlit but still burning money.
A Trick of Light and Fire [?]
Robles struck a lighter to the hiss of his torch. Fawt! A dark red flame belched from the nozzle. 
“Don’t think they believed in the Lightshy Crow up there,” he said as he opened the air. The flame warmed to a light blue at its base. The spiral of black smoke disappeared.
“He was a fool trying to use the demon-poisoned gift,” Tomrin said. The wound on his chest itched. The harder he tried not to scratch it the worse it seemed.
“The demons are locked away on Enfurnus,” Non said. “They can’t reach us here. I’m telling you. Don’t you find it strange how everyone blames them?” 
“Don’t tell us again how you think it’s our spooky gods,” Robles said. He held the envelope with his aunt’s letter near the torch head. “You might… get yourself caught by a Censor and… disappear yourself.” The envelope and paper suddenly disappeared in a poof. “Like magic.” 
“Like Censor Magic,” Non said, smiling at the idea of Censors having magic even if it was the Daughters of Heaven’s Glory who were the spelldancers, not Censors. “Maybe we should add a hidden compartment on the Scarab?” 
“A Censor Magic compartment, where we make things disappear,” Robles said. 
“No,” Tomrin said. “That is not happening. The Scarab has to be perfect.” 
Robles squinted over at Tomrin’s workbench. “Your Scarab looks like it needs a little Censor Magic to me,” he said, turning his head to make a sidelong face at the compound telescope.
Tomrin had only spared a glance at his own workbench when he’d entered. Containers filled with bits of glass and tools cluttered the space. Together with the Scarab, they covered most of the tabletop. The Scarab sat on six legs like a bug and its compound lenses formed its insect-like eyes. “What?” Tomrin demanded as he stared. 
“See it?” Robles said.
“See what?” Tomrin said loudly, growing irritated. Finally he saw what his friend ment. One of the Scarab’s armatures had been bent, then rebent like someone had thought to mess with it, and then had tried—and failed—to make good their mistake. The mirrors and lenses were now misaligned. “Feathers! You broke it!” 
“I didn’t break it,” Robles said. “I didn’t even touch it. I mean… I mean I touched it, but it wasn’t me.”
Tomrin bent over the Scarab and frobbed its fine-control dial.“You tried to focus it?” The fine control had never worked properly.
“No. Does work any better than you left it last night?” 
“Worse.” 
“Great,” Non said.
“Who the feathers broke it?” Tomrin demanded. “I had it mostly working! The Scarab needs to be perfect!”
Chapter 5: Into the Furnace
	And remember not to say or to show too much.
		—On spelldancing, from The Living Book of the Dead

“Woah! Woah! Woah! You’re losing it, man,” Robles said.
“Mostly working isn’t as good as actually working,” Non said morosely. 
Tomrin ignored him. “Of course I’m losing it. We demonstrate the Scarab in less than a week.” 
“And mostly working isn’t make us rich,” Non added. 
Tomrin sat and stared at the mess. 
His plans for the day evaporated. His housing situation would have to wait. New plans formed in his head as the Scarab’s gray eyes stared up at him blankly. Robles and Non continued to chat about hidden compartments—their censor magic. Tomrin idly told them they could add it to the leather carry case if they wanted a secret compartment so feathered badly. “The Scarab can’t have anything wrong with it. It has to be perfect.”
“Actually,” Robles said. “I already added a second pouch inside the carry case—for the extra lenses. It makes the case even better than the Scarab as far as I can tell. I’d say the poor little guy could use a little censor magic.” 
“Really could,” echoed Non. 
Tomrin rubbed his forehead and closed his eyes. “Please… I’m trying to think.” 
Robles barked a laugh. “Just saying, Censor Magic isn’t a flaw.” 
“Getting serious,” Non said. “What are we going to do about Fredick?” 
“Yes, Tomrin, what are we going to do?” Robles added, needling him. 
“What do you mean me?”
“You are a founder, now. That was what we were celebrating last night. You’re making all that extra money.”
Tomrin scoffed and wiped a cold spot of sweat on the back of his left right. “My promotion has not brought more money. As far as I can tell, it was in lieu of a raise Master Las promised me last month. Fredick is Master Laz’s problem to deal with,” Tomrin said. “He’s been here as long as anyone. If Master Lazoloth wants to stay loyal to Fredick that is his choice and I respect that.”
“A fact he is rubbing in Master Laz’s nose right now,” Non said. “That’s my bet.”
“Maybe,” Robles said. “But there is no bigger suck-up. He’s probably telling Big Laz just how great he is and how he needs to be getting more money, not less.” 
“Yes,” Robles agreed. His knife appeared in his hand. “Sending Fredick back to Zircos would be like sending them quisling. Seems it would hardly be fair play.” With a flip of his wrist the knife flew over the Scarab and workbenches and sank point first into the chair. Thunch. “But it would be a nice trick,” he added with a grin. 
“Careful,” Tomrin said. “That was close. You almost hit the Scarab.” 
Robles stepped close but didn’t push past. “Yes, I might break it. Were it not tempered to the heat of the sun.” 
“And you are too close to me. I can see your little spots.”
“I know,” Robles said. “And I can smell the ones on your shirt.” Robles moved past and walked down the aisle. He turned and added, “I thought your landlady does your laundry for you?” 
“She does.”
“Doesn’t look like it.” 
“Feathers! Could you just get your knife and get back to work?” 
“I could,” Robles said. “As could you. Looks to me like your precious Scarab needs you.” 
Down to Work [?]
His friend extracted the knife from the chair as Tomrin glanced at the glass Seasargus hovering in the window. The red-colored glass at the tips of his wings made it look like his feathers were dipped in burning ash. “I guess I do have to go home.” 
Robles stepped around him, knife in hand.
“You can watch me win the knife throw.” 
“I think I’d rather miss it.” 
Robles brandished his dagger in his face. “Your own royal appointments, my goodman, are looking less and less likely every day.”
Tormin picked up his flint striker. “Good!” he said and opened the gasflow to his torch and struck the flint. With a small explosion, his torch roared to angry life and began to burn up the shop’s money, adding an trickle of waste to the evergrowing hemorrhage of gold. 
It couldn’t be helped. The Scarab could not be broken, not when it could have no flaws. Finding a new place to live, or worrying about Rennly’s golden feathered badge, or even Gaz being dead--all would all have to wait.
Without thinking, Tomrin scratched the itch on his chest.
New Lenses [?]
Tomrin finished tearing down the Scarab and handed Non one of the mirrors  “It needs resurfaced.” 
One day someone would find a way to harden the non-silver coatings, but for now they had to handle them with care. The silver smudged at the slightest touch—the reason he had disallowed Fredick from touching the Scarab in the first place. 
“Fredick’s fat fingers?” Non asked. 
“Not mine,” Tomrin said. He turned to Robles. “I need a new batch of glass.” 
“Wouldn’t it be easier to fire Fredick?” Non asked. 
“Just fix that one,” Tomrin said impatiently. “Robles, let’s go make that glass.” 
“Just waiting on you,” Robles said. 
His friend followed him through the back door to the backshop to where workers minded the furnaces. Most of the different glasses were colored, but lenses required clear glass. Each glass, colored or not, was more than just quartz and soda. Besides the bins holding different grades of chert, more bins held a variety of sands and powders. 
Tomrin ran the scales. “A penny of White Death,” he said.
Robles ran the scoop. “White Death?” he asked, sounding surprised.
The white powder softened glass, making it bad for production lenses. “I want to rough a new Scarab out this morning.” 
“The morning is almost gone,” Robles said, scooping a small teaspoon of the white powder from the bin. He tipped it onto square weighing paper on the scale. “Too little?” he asked when the pennyweight didn’t rise. 
“Yes, a little more,” Tomrin said.
Robles made a face which tightened the skin on his neck in lines. “You’re the boss,” he said and heaped another scoop on the scale. The scale tipped. “Too much?” 
“No, mix it and heat it,” Tomrin said. “I need it quick.” 
“So quick that I do this?” Robles said as he pretended to slip as he dumped the powder from the weighing paper into a crucible. 
“Just melt it,” Tomrin said. Playing with any of the powders wasn’t funny. He swore sometimes his friend was mildly touched. “I hear the first thing people lose when poisoned by it is their balance.” 
Robles grunted, almost growling as he picked up the crucible. 
Tomrin left him frowning into it, and made his own way back to the front.
Dirty Work [?]
“Done,” Non said. 
Tomrin looked up from his own work and wiped at the bead of sweat on his nose that had been there for some time as he crafted a new graphite mold. 
Non held the mirrored glass piece for him. 
“I don’t need it now,” Tomrin said. “Let it dry more.” He could smell the acid used to eat the silver. “Or do a second coat.” 
Non groaned and turned back to the small tubs with washes he had out on his own workbench. “This stuff is dirty.” 
“I don’t want to hear it,” Tomrin said. “My hands are going to be stained as well.” 
The Pour [?]
When Robles walked in from the back, Tomrin was finishing the mold. “You are a genius, Tomrin,” Robles said over his shoulder. “A perfect cylindrical lens should bend light not at all!” 
“It will. You just don’t know what you are looking at. Is the glass  melted?” 
“I ran the bellows like a dog.” 
“Good.” Tomrin picked up a crown glass lens with his left hand and stood with his new mold in his other hand. With them and Non and Robles in tow, he headed to the back. 
In order to melt the new glass mix, Robles had chosen the furnace near the shop’s door opening into the back alley. When he flipped up the metal plate covering the shop’s smallest smelter, a rich glow of orange and a blast of heat burst out. Tomrin set the mold on the nearby metal workbench and picked up a pair of glass sheers. The study lens he handed to Non to hold. 
“You trust me to do the pour?” Robles asked as if there was any question who had the stabler hands. If there was one thing Robles had, it was steady hands. He had mastered pouring glass his first day. 
Tomrin pointed with the shears to the lens Non held. “Yes, you pour. I need only so much glass so as I can press the lens in.” 
“Ahh,” Robles said and picked up a large metal ladle from the table and closed his eyes and opened them quickly, then thrust the big spoon deep in the orange glow coming from the furnace-throat. He shook the handle with a sudden jarring motion before extracting the half sphere, just a quarter full of molten glass. The glass glowed a clear orange. Swinging around, he began pouring the hot, glowing fluid into the graphite mold. As he poured he raised the spoon and a fine filament formed between ladle and mold. 
Tomrin spread the glass shears and pushed the blades forward ready to snip the filament.
“Lower, lower—lower!” Robles said in a panicked voice. Tomrin eased the shears lower as Robles raised the spoon an inch, maybe an inch and a half. “N--n--now!” 
Tomrin snipped the glass. Chish. The snipped strand sunk into the pool of glass cooling in the mold. Tossing the shears aside he snatched the fat, round crownglass lens from Non’s hands. He held it above the warm glass in the mold, waiting for the glass to gel. He waited a second. Two. A second more. Slowly then he pushed the lens into the mold and down against the hot glass until it was snug. 
He peeled the warming lens off the cooling one. “Uhuh,” he said, letting out his breath. The two glasses, the cold and the hot, had not fused. “It worked.”
Robles ladled the remaining glass into the table.
Tomrin put on a glove and carefully dumped his new lens from the mold into his gloved hand. “We need to make another,” he said. 
“This lens is weird,” Non said, picking it up from Tomrin’s hand. “You think this is something?” 
“Just put it in the kiln,” Tomrin told him. “And get ready for the next. I want to use all the rest.”
More Than Gems [?]
“None are going to be perfectly perfect,” Robles said. 
“That doesn’t matter, yet,” Tomrin said. “We just need one that is good enough for now. I want the rest tempering.”
“Let’s get this done then,” Robles replied, messing up his voice as he did when hungry. “So we can go eat!”
“This time, Non, you press the lens in,” Tormin said. Before long, five new lenses sat cooling in the kiln. “That should be good.”
Robles eyes were wide and he wore a serious look on his sweaty face. “Food! Now!” 
Tomrin wiped sweat from his own forehead. “Yes. Fine.” He was hungry too, and his stomach grumbled from the lack of breakfast. “We have to let them cool anyway.”
I need my pack,” Robles said, and they headed up front instead of slipping out the back door. His friend kept the silliest things in his backpack, never going anywhere without it. Why he needed a dog harness when he didn’t own a dog, he’d never say. 
Tiff must have caught Tomrin staring at Fredick’s workstation. “He went out with his friend.  That Censor from this morning.” She made a face.
Tomrin just grunted though he knew exactly what she meant.
“He said he would be back,” Tiff added. 
“Too bad,” Non muttered under his breath. 
“Let’s go-o-o-o!” Robles said, as he slung his backpack over his shoulder. “You know we’d asked you and Ken to come, but I know you like to go home for lunch.” 
“Thank you, Robles,” she said. 
Ken just nodded. 
“Food!” Robles mooed again, then herded Tomrin and Non for the door.
Chapter 6: The Winged Helm Inn on Third
	And yet this crow shall fear the light, as men are afraid of the dark.
		—Translated from The Dark Verses

In the rafters, pigeons cooed as they spattered the helm on the sign with their dirty business. A porter who guarded the Helm’s open door recognised Tomrin, Non, and Robles right away. At least the man knew Robles well. He had worked the door at the Inn himself for a few months before joining the glass shop. In truth everyone in Menad seemed to know Robles, a fact no longer surprising to Tomrin. 
The porter flourished his hands and bowed to Robles. “The house, Master Robles, is always open to you—and yours.” 
“Why thank you, Felding. Thank you,” Robles said, bowing with a flourish of his own. “Keeping cool, I see?” 
“As always,” Felding replied. “And you, as always, a gentleman.” 
Again, Robles flourished his hand. “And ever at your service.” A penny between his fingers fell into Felding’s open palm.
“Why, thank you, Master Robles—the same.” 
Inside, clear windows in the roof filled the floor with yellow bars. “A booth,” Tomrin said to a server as where they wished to sit. The Rubish woman led them to a corner of the common room near the intersection outside. 
A singer, an Orioles girl his age, began a song on the small dais in the center of the room. Tomrin scooted in and sat with his back to the wall so he could see her. She was easily the most interesting thing here. Other than her it was just the regular clients and the various helms and mugs on the shelves. The whole room was coated in them; mugs, helms, mugs shaped like helms, even a helm shaped like a mug. 
The singer on the dias, however, treated his ears and eyes well. Unlike Tiff who was lovely in a soft Rubish way, the girl who sang, her voice high and pure, was beautiful in her own proud Orioles one. Her dark hair caught the light of the noon sun streaming in. When her song finished, Tomrin felt himself breathing again as he clapped with the other patrons. 
With a curtsy and smile, the girl stepped off the dias. 
Gambling Bears [?]
Robles turned back to the table. “I saw her first.”
“Whatever,” Tomrin said. 
“Whatever? She is better looking than a silver penny, I’d say.”
Tormin grunted. With the Leviathan’s Mark on his chest, he dared not say more. This was not a conversation he wanted, not with Robles, not with anyone. Maybe with a Serath feather or a thousand golden ducks in the bank he could find love, but until glass made him filthy rich, love was beyond him. “Women are too expensive.”
“You don’t have to buy her,” Robles said with an evil grin. “Maybe just rent her?”
Non laughed and Tomrin grinned wryly himself. “She doesn’t look like the type. And neither am I,” he added.
A new singer stepped onto the small stage and started singing a simple song they had all heard many times before. The man’s voice rolled from note to note, from word to word, but starting slowly. Soon another voice from the hall chimed in and Tomrin was sure he had heard the voice before. Rennly?
He sat near the dais adding his voice to the chorus as the singer sang about a family of sleeping mice headed for doom as they floated a stream.
Rennly’s dark silk suit glowed from the sun shining down the skylight above. His golden feather badge glinted, keeping rhythm with his breathing. He looked as if he were truly blessed by the gods. 
Robles added his voice to the mix. The three of them—the singer, Rennly and Robles—sung a three-part canon. Robles dropped his voice to a rich bass while Rennly sang tenor. Together with the singer’s baritone, they—and lyrics—drove the mice to their merry doom, their parts rotating through the canon, their voices greatly filling the short-ceilinged room, drowning out the sound of lunch being served and eaten as knives went still and cups sat undrank. The servers stopped their movements to listen and the patrons, largely Rubish workmen, listened to the choral, seemingly surprised by the sudden harmonization, as the higher notes of the singer’s baritone and Rennly’s tenor were bolstered by the sheer volume of Robles’ low notes. But Tomrin found himself staring at the girl.
“I wager they are up to something,” Non muttered, Tomrin glanced where he stared: Rennly and Fredick.
Armed With Forks and Knives [?]
Blonde Fredick sat at Rennly’s table staring back as Rennly, Robles, and the entertainer rounded down their song about the sleeping mice—who had all died on the rocks after tumbling over the edge of the world. The patrons clapped and without thinking Tomrin added his own brief show of appreciation to the cacophony. Fredick turned away and spoke to Rennly, their words too low under the noise to make out. 
Robles turned back to the table grinning.
“What are Fredrick and Rennly up to?” Tomrin asked him. 
Robles shrugged. “I don’t know. Since they met at the races, nothing good would be my bet.” 
A serving man interrupted them and asked for their orders. Tomrin had the lamb as did Robles, while Non had the humas. “And, a tin of low spirit tarsk for me, please,” Tomrin added before the man left the table. While they were eating, Non made a motion with his head to the door. Rennly and Fredick were leaving the Helm. “I can’t help feeling those two are plotting something,” Non said. 
Tomrin’s eyes followed Non’s. “Maybe.”
Though you sound a little paranoid,” Robles said. “Why don’t we find out?” He turned around and shouted at Rennly and Ferdick. “Hey! Ren! Fred! What were you two doing here sucking up all the clean air?” Fredick grimaced and waved dismissively, but Rennly walked over, leaving Fredick standing in the doorway.
He Who Holds A Feather [?]
The black censor rod waggled at Rennly’s hip.
The gods permitted whatever force they needed to maintain the faith, and that meant bows and arrows and other illegal weapons should they become necessary. Tomrin had read a tract about great barreled guns, but he doubted that the gods would trust Censors with them. Yet, the Serath had entrusted the black silks and golden feather to someone like Rennly, so Tomrin didn’t know anymore. 
Rennly kicked his foot up on the end of the bench next to Robles. He frowned a moment at him. “Your directions were terrible. I can’t trust you for anything.” 
“He knows about Gaz,” Robles said, brushing off Rennly’s criticisms as if praise. “Turns out the letter I received from my aunt this morning also had the news. I read it to him.” 
Rennly glanced at Tormin. “So you made it to work. Sleeping in on a workday...” He smacked his lips and shook his head and turned back to Robles. “As to what my new friend Fredick and I are doing here? Turns out I won the bet the other day. Your colleague was making good on the wager. He doesn’t know horses half as well as he thinks he does.”
“He doesn’t know half the things he thinks he does,” Robles said, as he waved amicably at Fredick.
“Is he wrong about Godly Glassworks?” Rennly asked.
“Depends. What did he say?” Non replied quickly.
“He says it is populated with fools.”
“Master Lazoloth isn’t a fool,” Tomrin said, his anger beginning to rise.
“Sounds like your Master Lazoloth isn’t the only one in charge,” Rennly said pointedly.
“Fredick is just jealous,” Robles said. “I’ve seen it before. Envy and jealousy is enough to turn some men green.”
“And this Lazoloth is handing out promotions when he can’t pay? And to someone who can’t show up on time. That hardly seems like the gods’ work to me.”
“It’s in lieu of more pay, Rennly,” Tomrin said. “That’s how business is done.”
“Is it now?”
“No one expects you to understand,” Robles said easily.
“I understand enough to know that if you and your master defile the name of the gods with your shop I’ll see it’s Censored faster than you can blink an eye.”
“Then we will be sure to be careful,” Robles said.
“See that you are,” Rennly said. “I’ll be watching. But now I must go. So much to do before heading to Woolad in the morning. I’ll see you there—if you manage to find your way for the funeral and the fair. Maybe we will square off for some games—like old times. The fair is going to be in the fairgrounds this year—like always—if you need directions.” 
“I think we all can find it,” Robles said, yawning.
Rennly nodded his head to the left and tapped his rod on the underside of the table. Chunk. He stepped off the bench. “Don’t get lost—or sleep in,” he added. 
He exited the Inn with Fredick, both disappearing into the sun.
The Green Orbs [?]
“With friends like that,” Non said. “I think your friend Gaz is in a better place.” 
“Rennly has a twisted honor all his own,” Robles said, with a shrug. “I guess that is something?” 
“Why does hate me so much?” Tomrin asked. “I mean I know why, but why can’t he just let it go?”
“He’s envious of you, Tomrin,” Robles said.
“Of me?”
“You are well on your way to be your father’s heir and look at Rennly.”
“Me? No. My father loves my brother Hadras too much,” Tomrin said. “And Rennly’s a Censor. I don’t see how he could be jealous.”
“Not jealous,” Robles said as he chewed. “Envy is different.”
“Envy. Jealousy. They are basically the same thing.” 
Robles swallowed. “Words don’t only just mean what you say they mean.” 
“You are just envious of me.”
Robles shook his head. “In your mind. Let’s get out of here,” he said. “Tomrin’s ego is filling the place up.”
Chapter 7: A Light Tap
	For no man lives without guilt. To do so is to be as a tree or an animal.
		--From the Living Book of the Dead

“You should have told your friend, Censor Magic, there, you saw his ghost friend, Gaz,” Non said as they headed out into the sun. “That would have thrown him.” 
Robles chuckled and soon they were back at the glass shop.
Inside Godly Glassworks, the noon heat had not yet penetrated the front. Fredick—with Rennly nowhere to be seen—sat at the desk area along the wall near Master Lazoloth’s office. Tomrin glanced away from Fredick to Laz’s door. It stood ajar. The master was out for lunch himself. Tiff and Ken were gone as well. 
“Now let’s see about getting the Scarab working,” Tomrin said to Non and Robles. Robles punched Non’s shoulder and the two of them left for the back shop. 
Tomrin began piecing the Scarab back together, and Robles and Non returned before Lazoloth did. They were all taking turns looking through the Scarab, when the old man stepped inside the glass shop. 
“Big Laz,” Robles called to the gray haired Peregrine man. Master Lazoloth shambled over as if the weight of the world rested on his shoulders, but as he drew closer, his eyes lit on the Scarab and he brightened. “I see you put it back together, but what is this? This lens is all rough.” 
“It needs grinding and polishing, but—” Tomrin tried to say.
“Just look,” Robles interrupted. “These are prototypes here inside.”
Master Lazoloth bent down and put his eye to the Scarab’s objective. “Interesting,” he said standing up. “The achromatism is gone.”
“Amazing isn’t it?” Robles asked.
“Amazing. Yes? The ramifications? What could they be?” Master Lazoloth mused to himself and patted Tomrin on the shoulder. “Even the fools at the Sapphire Front will have to see what we have here,” he said and headed for his office. 
“The ramifications...” Robles said, as if trying to ponder them himself.
“As long as we won’t be able to count all the ducks…” Non said. “I really don’t care about the ramifications.”
Tomrin pulled the doublet out of the armature. “This isn’t just about the money,” he said.
Master Laz often spoke of the ramifications of their work, but in truth, Tomrin rarely understood half of what he was saying. “Non, this one is yours. Grind it,” he added, keeping focused. If he started thinking about money his mind would wander and nothing would get done.
“Fine,” Non said, and slowly took the lens from Tomrin’s hand. 
“I’m going to look at the new ones you guys made,” Tomrin said, but continued to sit as Non and Robles left. His head was abuzz.
Finally, he stood and headed into the back room.
Fire and Glass and Honest Work [?]
The hot air in the back didn’t help and Tomrin soon retreated to the front of the shop. 
Fredick, his hands stuffed down the front of his pants, was looking at the Scarab. 
Tomrin walked over to him. “We need to talk,” he said. 
The blonde boy glanced up and raised an eyebrow. 
“This doesn’t look like what--” 
Tormin poked his hand into the boy’s face and touched his forehead with the tip of his index finger. “Listen to me,” he said as he pushed his finger against Fredick’s forehead. “You are not to touch the Scarab. I told you this.” Tomrin pulled his finger away from Fredick’s face and waited for him to respond, to acknowledge that he heard, that he understood.
Fredick said nothing, but turned and headed to his work area without a single word. Sweat cool  Tomrin’s hands but his legs boiled in his pants and his face burnt like he had fallen into a glass furnace headfirst.
Breathing heavily through his nose, he sat down at his bench and absently arranged his tools, not making his work area any less cluttered, just changing the shape of the mess. He sighed several times, then stood up and headed through the double doors to the back where it was hotter, but at least the heat made sense, what with the different furnaces for the different colored glass leaking heat into the air. 
He watched Non grind a tool for the new lenses. “Robles is outside,” Non said. 
“Thanks,” Tomrin but headed for the front again.
It would be hotter outside. 
Inside the Oven [?]
Fredick sat at his sidewall desk .
Master Lazoloth stood nearby in his office doorway. “Tomrin,” the old man said. “Can you come in a minute?” 
Tomrin’s walked over. Master Lazoloth held his office door open for him and he could feel Fredick’s eyes on his back, but refused to look at him. Instead he marched inside feeling awkward. “Fredick, come in too,” Master Laz said, then shut the office door behind them.
A pressure built in Tomrin’s skull as he waited for Master Lazoloth to sit while he and Fredick stood in front of the man’s desk, waiting for him to speak. Slowly, Lazoloth rested his tired hands on a stack of scattered papers. “Fredick says you hit him.” 
“What?” Tomrin said, glancing at Fredick. The boy wore no expression at all. “No. I didn’t hit you.” 
“You did,” Fredick said primly. His eyes flashed and he pointed to his forehead. “You hit me right here.” 
“I touched you. I didn’t hit you.” 
“So you did touch him?” Master Lazoloth said. 
“No. Yes. I touched his forehead. Is that what this is about?” 
“You hit me and should be fired.” 
Tomrin scoffed. “Big Laz, I—I touched him. I asked him to use his brain. He’s not supposed to touch the Scarab without my say so. He knows that.” 
“You are not my boss,” Fredick said.
“Yes, you are right, Fredick,” Master Lazoloth said. “But I am, and I don’t want you touching the Scarab either. We’re at a critical point now.” 
“He assaulted me, Master Lazoloth,” Fredick said, drawing himself up. 
Tomrin didn’t like the sound of what he was hearing. “Assault?” 
“Calm you yourself, Tomrin and Fredick,” Master Lazoloth said. “Both of you.”
“I will not calm myself,” Fredick said. “First you stop paying me, now you let this insect abuse me. You think I don’t know you have money in the vaults at the First Farmers Bank? You think I’m stupid?” He reached into his pocket and flashed a scrap of paper before jamming it back into his pants pocket.
“I don’t know what that is,” Master Lasoloth said.
“What money?” Tomrin wasn’t sure what he was hearing. “I thought payroll was late for everyone, because we need the Sapphire Front to pay us.”
“Yes. Yes. Fredick, next week,” Master Laz said.
Pure Lunacy [?]
Fredick began waving his other hand around like a loon. “You two are in this together! I know it. You are stealing from the rest of us!” 
“No,” Tomrin said, pulling back out of the path of Fredick’s errant finger-wagging.
“Calm down, Fredick!” Master Lazoloth all but shouted. 
“First you rob us, now you do nothing while this bug assaults me!” Fredick turned and marched out of the office, pushing the door open so hard it slammed against his outer workstation. He shouted as he rummaged through his stuff on his bench. “Lazoloth is robbing us blind! And I won’t stand for it! I’m taking this theft to the constabulary! There are laws! Even in Corundum!” 
Tormin’s hand went involuntarily to his front right pocket where he kept his papers. The billfold wasn’t there. 
Master Lazoloth began saying something. “I can’t believe I hired Fredick.  Nothing but a feathered—” Master Lazoloth stopped. “Tomrin? What is it?”
“I forgot my papers. They are in my other pants at home, I think.” 
Master Lazoloth’s face turned ashen. His ruddy skin lost several shades of colors as he fished his own billfold out. He opened his wallet and sighed. He looked up. “You better go get them. We can talk when you return. I think I figured out the ramifications.” 
“The ramifications?” Tomrin said.
“If we make the things small enough—” Master Lazoloth said. “But go, we can’t have you in jail over nothing.”
Tomrin blinked. Things? For a split second, he thought he could see what Master Lazoloth meant about the ramifications. An ephemeral image appeared in his mind, complex and colorful, and so intricate that he couldn’t focus on a single aspect as it shifted and disappeared. 
He wanted that picture back but Master Laz was right; he needed his papers. “Feathers, I’ll be back,” he swore and headed out of Laz’s door. 
Exiting the glass shop, he entered the furnace which was the afternoon’s heat. The feathered law was silly, but as a freed Peregrine, without his papers he taunted fate as surely as anything--doubly so with the Leviathan’s Mark growing large on his chest.
Chapter 8: While the Sun Still Shines 
Once you taste the ambrosia, you will realize: you and it are one.
		—From The Living Book of the Dead

Tomrin ran, disbelieving he could be so foolish as to forget his papers. The green glow and the specter of Gaz had distracted him, but still! To forget his papers! “Feathers!” The lamb chop in his belly sloshed in the low-spirit tarsk he’d drank at lunch. The afternoon’s hot air gusted against his face and his head swam with heat and he worried he might fall over if he kept up the pace. You’re free! You’re free! 
Finally he slowed. 
Fredick was somehow already halfway down Arcade Avenue and still running.
As he caught his breath, Tomrin tried to think what he would say if a constable did stop him and demanded proof he was who he claimed to be.  It took no brains to run a billy club. I don’t even have a penny to bribe him. The idea of being tossed in jail for the night because he didn’t have his papers angered him by how much it scared him. They might find out his secret.
At the Winged Helm Inn, he turned up the highway and swore under his breath at Fredick, and at the system. He felt himself going to the dark place where his anger and fear turned to madness, to the place where the evil growing in his chest beneath the Leviathan’s Mark called to him. There was no real reason he had to be the Emperor’s slave.
He had read the tracts. The Emperor had acted creatively in setting the Orish and Peregrine free. His tax and rules concerning patents was that cleverness. But by the rules in The Book of Light—and enforced by the Daughters of Heaven’s Glory and their Censors—none of the lesser races were allowed to be anything but slaves. Tomrin was convinced his own father had transferred his ownership to the Emperor because Dable Ocrin would be feathered if he was going to pay that kind of money. 
Inside the Attic Window [?]
“Mistress Carl! My papers!” Tomrin shouted. 
His clothes were gone.
“Don’t yell in my house!” she called back from the washroom. From the doorway she emerged disheveled, her arms and hands dripping wet. Blinking, she wiped her forehead with a pink arm. “I bet you are looking for your wallet. I found it in your green pants.” 
“Where is it?” he asked.
“On the kitchen table.” She followed him forward. “Your papers were in it.” Tomrin grabbed his billfold. His patents are safe inside. “You could wind up in real trouble,” she said. “I thought you knew you had to keep those on you? And the money.”
“Not now,” Tomrin said and stuffed the bondworks back inside and refolded the leather wallet and jammed it into his pants and tapped it through the fabric. He hadn’t noticed his wallet missing earlier at lunch because Non had paid. “I have to go,” he said, ignoring her question. 
“You shouldn’t be carrying so much money around,” Mistress Carl said. “What if you had been robbed.”
Her tone and pawing around in his billfold irritated him. “As I’ve told you, I’ve been busy.” He wanted to ask about his clothes but only added: “And I got to go.”
“I know I told you week-to-week,” Mistress Carl said.
Tomrin walked around her and to the front door. “Yes, I heard you.”
“Maybe if we bumped the monthly rent up a touch—maybe then I could let you stay month-to-month.”
“We will talk later,” Tomrin said. Opening the door, he stepped back out into the heat.
Not So Artful [?]
Back out front of Godly Glassworks, the glass Seasargus dozed as if it were weary from sun, even though the fiery blaze no longer glinted off the window. Tomrin’s pulled the glass weighted door open and glanced up Arcade to the Hall of Victory. The large dome quavered in the heat. Glancing down the way he’d come, he saw Fredick walking beside a man in brown. The two of them strode up the street with purpose. 
The yellow headed boy wasn’t bluffing about getting the authorities involved. 
Tomrin stepped inside, out of view and pulled the door closed. “Feathered Fredick!” he swore.
Members of the shop, front and back, stared at him. 
A single gas torch burnt unattended on the front bench. Robles sat nearby on a stool with Non standing at his side. Polishing rush dirtied Ken’s hands and fingers. He had more skill with polish than most. Master Lazoloth’s door stood closed. At Fredick’s desk, Frederick and everyone from the back milled about, whispering. 
“Yes? About Fredick?” Robles prompted.
“He’s coming with a constable.” 
“Then it is true,” Jan said. “Master Laz did steal the money?”
“No, it’s not true,” Tormin said.
“Fredick is just a paranoid fool, everyone,” Robles said. “You can see it in his beady eyes.” 
“I need this job,” Antsy, one of the backroom workers, said. 
“We all need this job,” Tomrin muttered, but worried the constable would arrest him for assault, as silly as it sounded. “I could feathered-well kill Fredick.”
Robles pulled out his knife. “Try this. It’s sharp,” he said softly, as a shadow moved in the window.
“Put that away. They are coming.” 
Robles slipped the knife back into its sheath. “Steady now,” he said.
“Me? You are going to get us into further trouble with your antics.”
The tall door of gray and blue glass swung open strong enough to feel it shake the floor as it banged against the wall. Fredick entered. A Rubish man with a gut in a tan uniform entered right behind him. 
The hexagon badge on the man’s chest proclaimed him the law with its gemstone design worked in silver. At his hip rode a tan, not black, nightstick. He enforced the emperor’s laws as the Censors enforced the gods’. 
With Shackles [?]
“You are Master Lazoloth?” the man said, blinking at Tomrin. A greasy sweat dribbled down his flushed pink face.
“No, not him,” Fredick said. He marched over to Master Laz’s door and yanked it open. “This is the thief.”
Master Lazoloth stood up and calmly walked to the doorway. “Is there some problem, Constable--?” 
“Officer of the Crown, Dhom Stabtus,” the Rubish said. “And I am afraid a credible accusation has been made per your character.”
“Really? My character?”
“And as one of the emperor’s bondsmen it can not be ignored.” 
“What are you saying, Officer Dhom?” Master Laz asked. 
The constables’ hands went to his belt and he hitched his pants before pulling out a pair of manacles which had been hiding under his belly. “I mean, I’m afraid, that you will have to come with me.” 
Master Lazoloth stepped from his office. “Freely.” He nodded at the cufts in the constable’s hands. “Those won’t be necessary.” 
“Put your hands out,” Constable Dhom commanded. “I’m afraid that it’s required in instances like this.” The man glanced around the room, almost pleading, he added, “You--you all understand.” 
Master Lazoloth raised his arms in front of himself and waited as Stabtus fastened and adjusted the manacles. “Too tight,” Lazoloth said. 
“That’s how they are,” the officer replied stoutly. He put his hands on Lazoloth’s upper arm and led him to the door. 
“One moment.” Master Lazoloth turned. “You are fired, Fredick. I don’t want to see you here ever again.” 
Fredick grinned his smarmiest grin. “Like I care to work for nothing.” 
“Alright,” Dhom said. “You can worry about all that later. But for now, your accuser has to come with us.” 
“What about us?” Jan asked. “What about us?”
“You a witness?” Stabtus asked?
“Yes, it’s everyone’s money he stole.” 
“I didn’t steal anything,” Master Laz said in a voice pinched as if not trying to show pain. 
Tomrin wanted to shout at Jan and Fredick and everyone. What is wrong with you? But he said nothing, worried Fredick might remember his accusation of assault. 
“That will all be worked out at the courthouse,” Stabtus said. “I don’t want any trouble, you hear? And don’t think about trying to bribe me.” He shot a strange look at Fredick then led Lazoloth outside.
 Fredick stepped behind him, and the door closed.
A House Divided [?]
The backhalfers all started talking at once. 
Robles tossed his knife at the wall. Chunth! Silence fell over everyone. “Now that I have your attention,” Robles said. He glanced at Tomrin. “I’m sure Founder Tomrin has something to tell you all.”
Tomrin blinked at him, wondering if his friend was having a go. “Um. The court will clear Master Laz,” he said. “Don’t worry. The glass shop will stay open.”
"I was thinking more that we needed to go down there and support him as a group,” Robles said. “As his loyal employees."
"I was thinking how nice it would be not having to deal with Fredick anymore," Non said. "Never should have hired him." 
"I think we all wish to know what is really going on,” Jan said.
She gave Non a hairy eyeball as she marched herself and the backhalfers to the front door. Her work crew followed her.
Tomrin turned off the gas torch and turned to Robles. "You think Fredick was stirring up trouble with them?”
“Did you really hit him?” Non asked. 
“No. I barely touched him.” 
“This isn’t your fault,” Robles said. “This is on Fredick.” 
“I think he felt slighted by your promotion,” Ken said. 
Tiff nodded. 
“Maybe.” Robles sounded skeptical. 
“But you hit him, Tomrin?” Non said. “Then he exploded.” 
“No, I don’t think that is it,” Robles said. He walked to the front door.
“You forgetting your pack, Robles?” Non said. “Or are you afraid to bring it to the courthouse?” 
“Censor Magic it over to me,” Robles said. Non picked up and made to toss the pack. “That means bring it to me.” 
Non scoffed. “That’s boring magic.”
True Glasser [?]
The shop’s traitors were well ahead of them on Arcade by the time Robles herded Tomrin, Non, Ken and Tiff out the door. More than half the shop had turned on Master Lazoloth.
The terrible pressure in Tomrin’s skull from the heat was building again and he feared he was about to explode like the initial effluence of a torch. “Let’s keep our distance.”
“Why?” Robles asked, shooting him a rare frown. 
 “They aren’t true glassers, like us,” Non offered.
 Ken grunted noncommittally and asked what they could expect next.
“Less mouths to feed,” Non said. 
“I hope you like working in the back then,” Tomrin said. 
Non groaned. “I was hoping to take over Fredick’s job, and now the Scarab works, you’ll have time yourself.” 
“There is always more to be done on it.”
At the bottom of the valley, Third Street shot straight towards the center of town to the temple. The Hall of Justice sat a block away under watch of the temple overlooking the city and the doves which cooed so freely in the eaves of buildings early that morning nested quietly now while the heat of the stone blocks of the courthouse boiled Tomrin’s eyes in his head. 
The Hall of Justice [?]
Inside, the floors needed polishing. Years of foot traffic had turned the marble into a dirty soapstone. A dirty light filtered down a muted brown through the skylights. Tall wooden doors with bronze plaques lined the two-story building and wooden benches held women with small children, not all Peregrine or Orish. One Rubish mother nursed a half-breed Peregrine child. Workmen—perhaps in the midst of rows with their neighbors—stood around glumly staring at doors closed to them. 
On a stone bench a man sat his sword hilt jutting out. The squires of the surrounding farms had to seek their justice in the courts now, just like all the others, though the right to wear swords was still afforded them. The Emperor’s Restoration had changed many things, but not all. 
Further down in the hallway outside the slave courts, the press of humanity was inhuman. Curse words flew freely. Orish and Peregrine alike bantered coarsely—men and women alike. It almost reminded Tomrin of going home to Woolad. But people in Woolad were more polite. Maybe heading home wasn’t going to be so bad. Cutting off the scales always took something out of him for a couple days and he could use the rest after tonight.
The Slave Courts [?]
Stabtus led Master Lazoloth to the slave court’s doors.
Jan and her group stood huddled on the far wall eyeing them. The slave courts ran with surprising efficiency. When one Rublish sued another, their trial could last years. Slaves however were not afforded such process. Unfair maybe, but Tomrin was glad that this would all be over soon so he could get back to work and away from the grating noise and thick musk.
A tattooed Orish man stepped in front of the constable. “I’ve been here all feathered day,” the man said, loudly. “Why in Seasargus’ Black Beak is this man going first?” 
“Get out of my way and wait your turn,” Officer Dhom said, pushing the man almost twice his size to the side. “Judge Reydal calls you when he calls you.” Officer Stabtus opened the door and waved Fredick and Master Lazoloth inside. “The rest of you wait here.” 
“What about witnesses for the defense?” Tomrin asked.
“You want to testify on the embezzler’s behalf?” 
“No, on Master Lazoloth’s behalf. He’s not an embezzler.” 
“Fine, whatever...but just you.” 
Tomrin glanced at a grinning Robles. “We trust you,” Robles said. But Non’s face contorted, and Tiff squeezed Ken’s hands. 
“Go on,” the officer said and Tomrin stepped through the door thinking it would be better to have Robles go instead. His friend had a way with words and with people, and he was at least Orioles if not Rubish. 
The Great Unwashed [?]
The presiding judge wore a red robe and sat on the high dais near the front of the room, not too high on his throne to look a Serath in the eyes, but high enough for his petitioners to bend their necks to meet his gaze. A brazen plaque on his desk proclaimed him one Jeremy Reydal, Esquire. The gray in his dark hair proclaimed him old enough to be his father, the silver wings at his temples making him look more dignified than any man had the right, as if the robe was not enough. Yet, somehow, he looked familiar… 
He hammering his gavel and shouted order be restored. Tomrin hadn’t heard what had caused the uproar, but from the back of the room men and women, Orish and Peregrine alike, jeered and roared with disdain. The place was mayhem save for one small island, a dark skinned Adaman woman in the back. Her bright blue eyes pierced Tomrin and for a second he wondered if she had done something to make the wound on his chest itch. 
“Councilor Marten!” The judge shouted. “Restrain your charge or I will have him restrained.” 
“Yes, your honor,” a large--even for an Orish man--answered from the banister, the wooden bar separating the judge, recorder, and bailiff from the unwashed masses and where the councilors and advocates stood with their clients. 
The Orish counselor, the one that answered to the name Marten, tucked a massive arm around the head and neck of his Orish charge. Dragging the man’s head to his mouth he spoke in the man’s upswept ear. The man tried to resist, but under the lawyer’s brown vest, muscles flexed and buckled his white shirt, quelling the man. “Listen!” Marten hissed loud enough for the court to hear.  Cut in the western style of Zircos, the man’s brown vest would not look out of place—save he was Orish.
Chapter 9: The Gamblers’ Union
Because we desperately need to it rhyme, 
So shall it be written in the annals of time.
		—The last line and verse from The Gambler’s Pledge

While the Peregrine lawyer on the other side chatted quietly with his own Orish client--just two Orish men taking their differences to the bar--a man with a golden hilted sword standing near the door began taking wagers bets on the outcome of the case in whispers. The local gentry were very bored indeed.
“Your Honor, Judge Reydal,” Dhom Stabus said in the descending quiet. “I have a case here of a freesoul versus a bondsman. A priority case.” 
“Are you feathered serious?” the first Orish man said. 
“Well, I think I have heard enough,” Judge Reydal said and slammed his gavel back down. He pointed the wooden thing at the man. “Guilty. Councilor Marten, I find your client guilty. Master Flager, owes the Master Cordwine two silvers. Now get out of my courtroom room before I hear another word! Bailiffs!” 
“Thank you, your Honor,” the Peregrine councilor for the prosecution said over the cacophony of the bailiffs removing the losing side of the argument. 
“So what is this case?” Judge Reydal asked once order was restored and the guilty and innocent parties had left the room and the bet’s paid out in another round of whispers.
“A case of embezzled funds, your Honor. This, Master Lazoloth, here is accused by Fredrick Kistabal here of stealing money from the common fund of the company they work at, Godly Glassworks.” 
“Well, take off his shackles, Dhom,” Judge Reydal said. “No one is to appear before me in chains. You know the rules.” Stabtus undid the manacles and marched back outside the courtroom.
Tomrin tried to smile at Master Lazoloth, but feared all he did was frown. Glancing away, his eyes lit on the court recorder and he tried not to stare. She was the prim and proper Orioles singer from the Winged Helm Inn. While she had smiled then, now she had a severity to her—like she took this job far too seriously. And the judge? Was he the same man? Here in his red silk judge’s gown he looked quite different. In a way it seemed even the girls’ spots might have changed.
A Day In Court [?]
Tomrin pulled his eyes from the girl, but found himself glancing instead at the Adaman women. His eyes glided over everyone else save the large Orish counselor and the judge as the court grew silent under the threat of his gavel.
The prosecuting lawyer stated the charges against Master Lazoloth and the judge handed Big Laz over to the losing lawyer. “Counselor Marten,” Judge Reydal asked. “Does your client understand the charges against him?” 
The lawyer did not even look at Master Laz. “Yes, your Honor.” 
“Then...how does he plead?”
“Not guilty.”
“Very well,” the judge drawled as if he’d said the same so many times he’d lost count. “The court will hear the evidence.” He turned his attention to the Peregrine lawyer conferring with Fredick. “Councilor Divertay, evidence? Arguments? For the the court please.” The man raised a finger and continued to nod his head at Fredick. “Today, Counselor?” 
“Yes, Judge Reydal,” counselor Divertay said, turning his head towards the judges’ high desk. “The accused--”
“Master Lazoloth,” Counselor Marten injected as the man with the gold sword began to whisper.
Divertay swatted a hand at them both as if at a flies. “Master Lazoloth refuses to pay his employees despite having the money in the bank,” he continued. “This is theft and he must pay them their rightful due. To do otherwise is stealing.” 
“I’m not a thief,” Master Lazoloth said. The judge raised an eyebrow at him, and Counselor Marten put a hand on his shoulder and whispered something in his ear.
“Farmers First Bank,” Master Lazoloth said aloud. 
“And?” the judge said. 
“I ask the court that Master Lazoloth’s accounts be subpoenaed without delay,” Counselor Marten said. “Farmers First Bank.” 
“Counselor Divertay?” the judge said. “Will the prosecution stand by those records as proof of guilt or innocence?” 
Divertay glanced at Fredick. The blond-headed boy nodded. “Yes, your Honor.” 
“And you, Master Lazoloth?” The judge said. 
“Yes,” Laz’s lawyer answered for him. “However, we would like to reserve the right to call witnesses.” 
“Naturally,” the judge said. 
“As would we.” 
The judge glanced at Divertay. “So someone has seen the man commit this theft? Is that what I am hearing.”
“No, your honor. Not to my knowledge.” 
“No, I thought not. But, you are well within your rights, I suppose.” The judge then directed one of his bailiffs to go to the Farmers First Bank and to return with the ledgers of interest. “And don’t dally. This should be open and shut. The next order of business?” he said, turning to the girl furiously writing at her own smaller desk below his. “There is still much to do while the sun still shines,” he added with a smile.
The gambler continued his whispering.
The Price of Justice [?]
The girl flipped through her notebook. “You could call up...”
Before she could bring up a name from the list Tomrin supposed she had been compiling all day, and before the bailiff could exit the door, Marten objected. “I’m sorry, your Honor, but I would like to suggest a brief recess….certain...important security concerns...presented by this case.” The counselor glanced from the Adaman woman at the back of the room to the judge. “And what they might pose to the Crystal Throne.” The Orish man added, sounding not the least bit confused now.
The judge frowned. “What considerations?” 
“They are of a nature, Judge, that we shouldn’t disclose them in open court—not without reviewing them with him and you first.” 
“Irregular, Counselor.” The judge glanced at Divertay and Fredick. “But without objections I am obliged to grant everyone a recess. Counselor Divertay?”
Divertay glanced up from his whispered discussion with Fredick. “No. No objections, your honor.” 
The judge slammed his gavel down. “Granted.” He stood up and walked to the door behind his chair and turned. 
The remaining bailiffs began to clear the courtroom as Marten ushered Master Lazoloth through the bar towards the front. Fredick and Divertay followed them out. Lastly came the court recorder. Tomrin’s eyes followed her unconsciously. Her gray dress, cut high enough to be modest but not too low to be staid, flattered her figure. 
I’m married to my work, Tomrin reminded himself when a bailiff instructed him that he had to leave as well.
“I Love Easy,” [?]
Outside the courtroom, Robles wanted to know everything that was going on inside. 
“It was strange,” Tomrin said, searching the crowd for the Adaman woman. She had somehow managed to disappear. 
“What was?” 
“The lawyer knew about our work with the Sapphire Front…I think,” Tomrin suspected the redheaded woman with the bronze skin and blue eyes, but he didn’t know how to explain her part in the matter. “That’s all I can figure.” 
“Master Lazoloth must have told him?” 
“I don’t know. Fredick and his lawyer were chatting like crazy, but Master Laz barely said a word to his.” 
“Sort of sudden like,” Non said. 
“It was sudden...” Tomrin thought to add more, but his eyes followed Robles and Non’s glances to the courtroom door. The door was open and the court recorder stepped out into the hallway. 
“Uhh,” Non gunted.
“Remember, I saw her first,” Robles whispered. 
The girl’s eyes lit on Tomrin and she walked over. “Founder Tomrin Ocrin?” she said, sounding a bit surprised herself at the words. 
“Yes,” Tomrin said. “Uh-I’m Tomrin.”
“And a Founder,” Robles added. “But it sounds so much more official when you say it.”
“That is because it is official,” the girl said, not turning her big brown, and no-nonsense eyes on Robles, but keeping them Firmly locked on Tomrin. “Counselor Marten has requested you.” She turned around and beckoned him over her shoulder with a hand. “This way, please.” 
Robles pushed Tomrin after her. 
“Feathers! Sorry,” he blurted.
Shady Ways Along Shady Rows [?]
“Smooth!” came Robles’ snicker down the hall at him. 
The girl ignored him and led Tomrin back into the courtroom. The bailiff at the door let her through with only a cursory glance. They passed through the banister to the front of the courtroom and headed for the small door the counselors had left though. 
Tormin read the nameplate on her deck. “Elisah Reydal?” 
“Yes?” she asked curtly. 
“You are related to the judge?” 
“He is my father.” 
“Why do you think the counselor wants to see me?” Ideas of Fredick pressing more charges filled Tomrin with a touch of dread.
“I didn’t think to ask and he didn’t think to tell me,” Eliash said. “It’s not my life to know such things.” She led him out into the hallway and down a long aisle of leather bound law books. Ladders reaching up to the highest ones. Such wasted effort on such uselessness. No doubt half the books dealt with owning and punishing slaves.
Elisah stopped and knocked on a door. A muffled call came from the other side. “Come in.” 
She turned the doorknob and ushered Tomrin inside. “Thank you, Recorder Reydal,” the large Orish counselor said. Elisah nodded and shut the door without a word. The man held out a hand towards Tomrin. “Come. Sit.”
Two chairs flanked the man, but he motioned to a smaller one across the table. 
Tomrin walked to the solitary chair. “Where is Lazoloth?” he asked as he sat. “You know he is innocent, right, Councilor?” 
“Of course he is,” the man said. “And call me Marten. That’s what they always called me in the army: Emerald Front. I fought during the Restoration.” 
“Thank you for that,” Tomrin said, “But--uh--?” 
“But why do I want to see you?” 
“Yes, I suppose that, and um--” Tomrin glanced around. “Where is Master Laz?” 
“He is patiently awaiting the account books,” Marten said, folding his massive hands on the table. “This little meeting is not about that. I have someone here who wants to speak with you.” Marten’s eye roved over to a small door in the wall in the corner of the room. 
Marten was not a small man and the chair groaned as he stood up. Even though he wore a vest like a skinny man for Zircos, he was anything but skinny. Regardless, he moved with a dancer’s grace and he acted far more intelligent than most Orish men his size. When he opened the far door, the tall Adaman woman from the courtroom stepped out of the shadowy adjoining room. 
“Lady Margretta,” Marten said. “Tomrin Ocrin—as you well know.”
The Serpent’s Forked Tongue [?]
“Hello,” Tomrin said. 
It was more of a question than anything. How did this woman know him? He had stared at her almost the whole time and now she was here, and knew of him without even having spared him more than a glance.
Her dress swished as she sashayed into the room. She waited until she was on the other side of the table before she said a thing. Speaking to Marten she said, “Thank you, Marten.” Turning she said: “Hello, Tomrin. It is nice to see you again.” Tomrin had risen from his chair and she motioned for him to sit. “But imagine my surprise seeing you here today?” She was pure business, folding her bronze hands in front of herself on the table on Marten’s right. 
“I—I don’t remember you?” Tormin said, wondering how she knew him. Perhaps she was sent by someone in the Saphire Front—or even the Emerald Front. Spies and spies with spies.
“Marten and I are not often in town,” the dark skinned woman said. “Marten more than I.”
Tomrin glanced at the big man. “You came to our attention some time back--” the larger man said.
Margretta held up a hand to silence him and continued. “We are looking for someone much like yourself, someone with talents—your talents.” The tone she took did not make Tomrin think she meant his talents with glass, and his scalp began to buzz.
“I--ah--don’t know if I’m looking for new employment. But, I am-uh—am a loyal subject of the Empire,” he added.
“You have many talents, Tomrin. That I am convinced. Remember Lord Southerly’s farm?”
“Spy glasses then?” Tomrin said. 
“Opera glasses was what I was told, and ostensibly that is all you were led to believe?”
“Everything is connected,” Tomrin said. “I was working on opera glasses but that was just the line we are all fed by the kind of people who answer to Lord Southerly.” 
Living there was the first time Tomrin had removed the scales from his chest.
It had not gone well and he spent several days in the infirmary from a flu a caught after the scales became infected.
Lord Southerly’s [?]
Lady Margretta slowly unfolded her fingers and continued to unravel her lies or half truths, or worse, the truth. “This goes beyond spying,” she said as Tomrin stared at her hands, the color of her skin was lighter on her palms—similar to that of the one dark skinned Silvan he’d once seen—but Margretta didn’t have the upswept ears of that far eastern race.
Tomrin glanced over to Marten. “I don’t know anything about anything else,” he said. “I’m only good with glass. I worked in my father’s carpentry shop, but I was never any good...” 
Marten grinned and cocked his head slightly to the left as Margretta grunted as if the two of them  disbelieved every word together as one. “Let’s talk about what I can offer,” Margretta said.
Tomrin hemmed softly to himself and waited, hoping she had nothing he wanted, because he was beginning to worry she might be referring not to just any old skill at all. He only needed the slightest excuse and this interview was over.
“First I can end proceedings against your Master Lazoloth straight away. I can clear him in Jarvis’ name,” she said, raising her right index finger, then reaching under the table with her left hand she returned it to the top with an ivory colored card. Smiling like a cat with a mouse, she pushed the small rectangle forward, across the table towards him.
The card held the imperial seal, the same as his own patents. “Not bondworks?” Tomrin said.
“Something else entirely,” Margretta allowed.
The peach stamped in black ink was signed in what might have well been the Emperor’s own hand. Tomrin waited, then, glancing up at her and Marten, said: “But you say, there is nothing to worry about. The master will already be cleared.” 
Marten folded his arms across his vest. “Well,” he said. “No one can know for sure.” 
Margretta tapped the card and frowned. “That doesn’t mean you wouldn’t be better off in my care.” 
“I may be bound to the Emperor’s will—” Tomrin said. 
He reached out and picked up the card from the table and read the words aloud. “The bearer of this bond speaks for me, Lord of the Crystal Throne, Champion of the East, and Emperor of Corundum, Lord Jarvis Teaubril. Do as they command, and you do as I command.” He set the card back down on the table, and reached into his own pocket but didn’t withdraw his billfold. “My papers say that I am free to disregard any master who does not sit upon the Crystal Throne itself. It too is signed by Jarvis.” 
“Jarvis!” Margretta scoffed and slid the card back across the table. “It is true, you are free to disregard me. As you are not part of the hierarchy... The Emperor’s generosity sometimes tries my patience,” she muttered more to herself, than to him or Marten. “I have many talents myself, and there are things I would teach you, young Tomrin. This shop of yours, it’s running out of money. Then where will you be?”
Again, Tomrin heard hints. His neck prickled. The woman spoke like a Dark Sister hinting at darker things.
Chapter 10: A New Turn of the Cycle
	The first unwritten rule of power is spy on your neighbor.
		—From The Living Book of the Dead

Lady Margretta made a face, raising her eyebrows and grinning down at him. “The world is a dangerous place, young man, as I’m sure you know,” she said. “We have taken a hands off approach until now, but with Censors sniffing around, things can no longer continue as usual.”
“Censors?” Tormin said. “Hands off? We?”
“Yes, Censors. One false move,” the woman said. “And men who stand tall today, plummet the next.” 
“I’m not sure about that… I’m not trying to plummet,” Tomrin said. “I’m a glass worker. I’m happy to work glass until the day I die.” 
“And when your master runs out of money…or is convicted?” 
“You aren’t going to force the judge—?” 
“I am not here to force him,’ she said.
 Tomrin pushed out his chair. “I think I would like to leave.”
“Wait!” the woman said sharply. “You think everything is just fine, but I can tell you, you are in a precarious spot, young man. You are more like your Master Lazoloth than you may know. You ever wonder why he never married?” 
“I’m sure he has his reasons.” 
“And you?” 
“Still young.” 
“Yes, but you won’t be young forever, yet how much time have you put into thinking about finding a wife?” 
“I’m not carefree about such things. I am married to glass.” 
“Yet you are careless. Not all hidden things are fully hidden, so trust me when I tell you this. Some people can see more clearly than others. You are gossling flying blind.”
“And by going with you to where, exactly, would my eyes be opened? My blindness cured?” 
The woman lowered her gaze a foot and looked right at his chest. “You would have to trust me.” 
“I am not the trusting type,” Tomrin said and turned away. He walked to the door as his scaly wound itched under his shirt. “I will be right here in Menad,” he said before opening the door. “Where I belong. I am a glassworker and nothing more. If you think I want to be something more, you are mistaken. Spying on me changes nothing.”
The First Strand [?]
“I wouldn’t call it spying,” the woman said. 
Tomrin wanted to ask her just how much she knew, but was afraid he might learn she knew far too much. He always feared what would happen if a Censor or Daughter of Heaven’s Glory found him. But dealing with this creature, a Dark Sister? she promised him a far worse fate. Women who sold their souls to the demons were pure evil. He glanced at Marten but the man acted unconcerned by her. Perhaps he knows. But the Emperor?
The woman must have caught the hint of a question in his eyes. “I can clarify many things for you,” Margretta said. “But not here, not in Menad.” 
“I’m not sure I need things cleared up,” Tomrin said. 
“That is because you are closed—and live in shadows,” Margretta said, softly. “The West is in turmoil. That strife is headed this way. Slavers and Censors from the Zircos have already entered Corundum and they are not particular about who they stop, or who they search.” 
“That’s the Emperor’s fault.” 
“Perhaps I should let his Highness know that he should do more?” she said, sardonically. 
“You have his writ.” 
“That’s true, but Censors move freely. Not even Jarvis can do much about them. I may have the Emperor’s ear, but he is in Corundum. And that does not help against overzealous men in black. A whole new slew of them entered town this afternoon. With slavers,” Margretta added, smirking almost as if she were the one commanding this horde she conjured from thin air.
Sweat beaded on Tomrin’s forehead, but he refused to wipe it. “I’m a loyal subject with nothing to fear. The slavers, I leave to you and to the Emperor.” 
“They will be dealt with, and legally. But slavers are nasty and brutish men,” Margretta said. “And one might ask how little you go to temple? And a Censor might just wonder how good of a person you truly are.” 
“If you think I’ve done something wrong, why don’t you call the Censors yourself?” Tomrin said, hoping to bluff his way out of this conversation. “But for now, I think I have heard enough.” 
The Second Attack [?]
“And Master Lazoloth?” Margretta asked.
“What about him?” 
“Would you let him suffer a terrible fate, bankruptcy or worse, when you could end it, just to remain in this crummy little town, always looking over your shoulders, always afraid?” 
“I’m not afraid,” Tomrin said, feeling ice in his stomach again. His heart began pounding. “I am going now, so please consider helping Master Lazoloth—if you can. He is a good person.” 
“So naive,” Margretta said, shaking her head. “Be careful, Master Tomrin. You walk a terrible thin line.” She didn’t say the words “You walk the Shadow Line,” but Tomrin heard them in his head. He wondered if she feared he would trip and fall into the light? He worried that himself. But also that he might slip into the darkness.
“I try to do what is right. You should too,” he said.
“What is right? Our world is filled with only half-truth. And outright lies. Sometimes it is hard to know the difference between truth and lies.” 
“And right and wrong?” 
“Exactly.” 
“I don’t find it hard. You should help Lazoloth because he is a good person. The top is not the bottom. And the left is not the right.” 
“Laugh and make light.” Margretta turned to Marten. “I told you he was a fool and a coward both.”
The First Retreat [?]
“I’ll just let myself out.” The anger in Tomrin’s words sounded harsh in his ears. He didn’t want to be afraid and he didn’t want to act a fool. What could anyone know about him, anyway? Nothing! There was no way she could know. Unless she was a Sister of the Dark and he didn’t want to think about that. However, he couldn’t ignore the fact that she might know things about him… how and what exactly, she kept oblique—probably out of caution? Tomrin opened the door.
“Done?” Elisah asked as he walked past her out of the room. 
“Yes,” Tomrin said. 
“I need to see Master Lazoloth again, Mistress Reydal,” Marten said. 
“Yes, Counselor,” she replied. “And I will let the bailiffs know as soon as I am done with Founder Ocrin.” 
The counselor walked to the door. “Actually, I will do it. You see that Founder Ocrin is taken care of. 
“Yes, Counselor.” 
“And you—” Marten turned to Tomrin. “—take care and good luck.” 
“If Master Lazoloth is innocent it shouldn’t take luck.” 
“Well—” 
“My father will make that determination,” Elisah said. “Come, let’s go.” 
Back Channels [?]
Down the hallway, Rennly Rickot walked towards them. “What’s he doing here?” Tomrin asked. 
Elisah didn’t answer but raised her voice. “No one is allowed back here.”
Rennly strutted forward until his badge was in her face. “I don’t know if you can see, but I am a Censor.”
“Censor or not; only sworn members of the court are allowed back here,” Elisah said.
Rennly jutted a finger around her and pointed at Tomrin. “This is on the court now?”
“He is in my custody, and if you don’t want to create an incident, Censor, I suggest you find your way out the same way you came in. For I am fully within my power to arrest you right here and right now. So please, turn around and exit the hallway the way you came in.”
Rennly eyed her coldly. “As long as you have this little one in hand,” he said, nodding at Tomrin. “I will take my leave.” He whirled around and headed back down the hall. 
Elisah scrunched up her chin and breathed heavily through her nose until he disappeared through a side door without a look back. “Now,” she said and led Tomrin back to the courtroom and into the hallway where Robles and Non waited with the others. Non was busy biting a nail while Robles was confessing to him that he was the one who stole all the glasswork’s gold. “With magic!” 
Tomrin sighed. “Be serious.” 
“What did the lawyer want?” Robles asked. 
“He wanted to tell me he thought Mater Lazoloth was innocent.” 
“Took him long enough to tell you that,” Non said. 
“I know.”
“What now?” Robles asked.
“Now we wait for the bailiff to return to proceed.” 
“So did you see Big Laz?” Non asked. 
“No, just his lawyer.” 
“And the girl,” Robles said. “What about here?”
“Elisah Reydal. She is the judges’ daughter.” 
“Elisah,” Robles mused softly. “But I still saw her first.” 
“She is all yours,” Tomrin said, smiling to himself at how she had told Rennly off.
Lessons Unlearned [?]
The bailiff returned and the court reconvened.
When Tomrin reentered the courtroom he glanced around the spectator seats, feeling watched. The lady Margretta had moved to the opposite corner in the back. She didn’t look at him but when he glanced away he felt her eyes boring into his back. When Judge Reydal entered Tomrin’s surreptitious glances at the dark skinned woman and fair court recorder ceased.
The man began to speak. “Counselors, you’ve seen the evidence. Now I will hear the arguments from the prosecution.” He made no other mention of the secret talks from earlier.
Fredick and Divertay whispered amongst themselves for several seconds. “Um, yes, Judge,” Divertay finally said aloud. “As you could see from the ledgers, there is money in the glasswork’s accounts under Master Lazoloth’s name. If he can’t afford to pay his employees, why is this money there?” 
Master Lazoloth whispered something to Marten on the other side.
“Judge,” Marten said. “It seems it’s the prosecution’s stance that Founder Lazoloth is stealing from his fledgling company by putting monies into his accounts. But to me that seems the opposite of the charge being levied.” 
“This is a symptom, Judge,” Divertay said.
“Of what?” Judge Reydal asked.
“Of corruption, your Honor,” Divertay replied. “If he has money why is he hiding it? Why won’t he pay his employees?”
Tomrin tapped his billfold. It held the undeposited banknotes drawn from the Lazoloth’s account. “How much money are we talking about?” he asked. 
Judge Reydal turned his head towards Tomrin. “This is my court, young man; I ask the questions. So who are you and why do you want to know so badly as to interrupt?” 
Tormrin blinked as he pulled out his pocketbook. “I’m—uh—a Founder as well, of--uh--Godly Glassworks, and I have here--” He began counting out the bills. “—a couple months of pay all drawn from the Glasswork’s account--no—from Master Lazoloth’s account with Farmers First Bank.” Tomrin could feel all the eyes in the courtroom fall on him, not just the judge’s and the Adaman lady’s. 
The judge turned to his nearest bailiff. “I want to see those,” the judge said, pointing vaguely at Tomrin. 
The bailiff pushed his way through the bar and Tomrin placed the small stack of banknotes in the man’s outstretched hands. 
The Balance Money Makes [?]
The man shook his head. “This is crazy.” 
“I believe in the glassworks,” Tomrin said.
“What is going on, Chall?” Judge Reydal asked.
 The bailiff shrugged. “Nothing, your Honor.”
“Will you bring them to me?” Irritation rang in the judge’s question.
“Yes,” Chall said, as if waking himself from a dream. “Yes, your Honor.” 
Tomrin turned his head to see what Fredick and Divertay were thinking. Fredick stared blankly forward. Tomrin hoped this meant the blonde-headed boy knew he was losing. 
The bailiff handed the bills to the judge and one-by-one he listed off the amounts. “Recorder, how much was that?”
“One moment, your Honor,” his daughter said, all protocol.
The judge nodded over the ledger as she read off the cumulative amount. “Master Lazoloth, did you know anything about this?” he asked, finally looking up.
Master Laz glanced at Marten. “No, your Honor,” Master Lazoloth said. “I keep my own records. I thought that account was all but empty.” 
The judge let out a long sigh and rubbed the flowing red sleeves of his robes over his forehead. “Counselor Divertay, have you any further arguments?” 
“Um, your Honor--” 
“Perhaps ones that make some semblance of sense?” Judge Reydal added. The court burst forth with hoots and the judge was forced to bring down his gavel. “Quiet! Feathers! Quiet! Divertay! Counselor, I asked you a question,” he continued when the court had quieted.
Divertay glanced at Fredick then back to the judge. “The prosecution has no further arguments.” 
“Well, Counselor Marten?” Judge Reydal said. “Anything you would like to add before I make my ruling?” 
“No, your Honor.” Tomrin could hear the smile on the man’s face. He had won as he knew he would. 
“Then I am going to sum everything up,” said the judge. “As far as I can tell Master Lazoloth has operated his glass shop with honor and dignity, and based on our side bar it will have money soon to pay all the employees what they are owed. That there is a discrepancy is not his fault, but because one of the employees has not been visiting the bank--for whatever reason--but one can imagine out of loyalty to Master Lazoloth, perhaps something the defense could learn from. So it seems to me that Master Lazoloth has behaved as to reflect well on his own master, the Emperor, and as such I am forced to conclude that he is in fact innocent of the crime of embezzlement. You are free to go. And, you, young man,” the judge said, pointing at Fredick. “Perhaps this has taught you something about the value of loyalty?” 
“Yes, your Honor,” Fredick said, his voice barely audible over the buzz in the court. The man with the golden sword, nearly the loudest of the lot.
“And you, Master Lazoloth, I would suggest you fire him.” 
“I already did.”
“Well, then before I adjourn for the day I would like to thank you on behalf of the Crystal Throne. You are a patriot and an inspiration.” 
“Thank you, your Honor.” 
Judge Reydal turned Fredick. “And you: Please do not darken my courtroom any time soon.” 
“No, Judge,” Fredick said.
Justice Done [?]
The judge glanced at the skylights oozing the last of the day’s light into the room. “This court is now adjourned.” He hammered his gavel down, stood up, and handed the account book to the bailiff and the bank notes to his daughter. He exited to the din of his court rollicking and money changing hands, mostly with the man with the golden sword.
The judge’s daughter motioned to Tomrin and held up his bank notes. A bailiff let him through the bar. The girl slid the bankdraws into Tomrin’s hand. “This was all because you couldn’t go to the bank?” 
“What? No--” 
“It’s probably just as well,” she continued. “Now your master knows who he can trust.” 
Tomrin began putting the bills away. “Thanks, I guess, but I’ve been busy, Court Recorder Reydal.” 
“Don’t get all high and mighty with me,” she replied with a sniff. 
“I’m not,” Tomrin said, glancing away to where Lady Margretta had been sitting. The woman’s seat sat empty. She had to have ran to have left so fast. Tomrin left the girl standing there and went over to shake Master Lazoloth’s hand.
Big Laz thanked him and Marten, and then he and Tomrin headed out into the hallway where everyone should have been waiting for him. Several of the backhalfers were gone and Fredick was nowhere in sight. “Those disloyal dogs are all fired,” Master Lazoloth said of those that didn’t congratulate him on his victory. “And they can go to the feathered Lake of Fire for all I care.” 
Robles laughed but Tomrin was surprised to hear the man swear, true anger in his words. 
“Now what?” Non asked when they reached the front door of the courthouse. Outside the sun hung low over the valleyside. 
“I need to lock the shop for the night,” Master Lazoloth said. 
“I’m already headed back up there,” Tomrin said. “I need to finish up something before I can head home to Woolad tomorrow.” 
“That’s right,” Master Laz said. “You two have lost a friend.” He dug out a brass key. “I guess you can lock the shop, and leave the key under the stone for me tomorrow.” 
“I will,” Tomrin said, taking the key from Lazoloth. He wanted to ask the man about a place to stay, but waited. Tomorrow would be better. He and the others said their goodnights to Master Laz. He looked old and tired--but victorious--and he headed for his house near the center of town. 
“Well, I think this calls for a victory drink,” Robles announced.
“I suppose it does,” Tomrin allowed. He figured a bit of high-spirit tarsk would take the edge off of having to burn the scales on his chest. “I need a strong drink—or three after today.” 
Both Non and Robles agreed.
Chapter 11: The Leviathan’s Mark
 All is not lost, unless the Fates have acted.
		—A Silvan saying lost to the Fifth Age

The Winged Helm Inn’s selection of music throughout the week was usually local singers and players, Rubish men, or Peregrine songbirds and Orish grist, the best of a hard people ground down harder, but tonight the four on the stage were all Orioles. From their dress, they were from Zircos. They and the men  the bar proved lady Margretta’s words true. High-spirit drinking slavers mixed with granite faced Censors in black.
Tomrin and Robles had their backs to the wall. “My aunt’s letter said they were coming,” Robles said.
Tomrin picked up his own tin of high-spirit tarsk—only slightly smaller for it. He slammed the tin down after shooting the burning contents into his mouth and swallowing. “Uhg! Feathers,” he said. The slavers wore vests in the style of the west and their coiled leather strops brushed their neighbors when they moved, but it was the men clad in black silk at the bar who worried Tomrin most. They, like the slavers, were clearly from the Zircos. “We should go somewhere else.”
“It’s going to be the same everywhere,” Non said. 
“You’ll just have to drink harder,” Robles said. “At least Master Lazoloth is cleared. Life will seem better with more tarsk. Be glad we aren’t dead like Gaz.” 
Tomrin raised his other mug filled with low spirit tarsk. “To Menad. To judge Reydal,” he said. “And to not being dead, I guess.” 
“And to his daughter,” Robles added. He raised his own mug and so did Non. They each took a drink. One of the Orioles men at the bar turned and sneered at them and the room. 
“I think I am going to drink this down and head to work,” Tomrin said and finished his low-spirit drink.
In Town [?]
Robles stood. “Let me settle up,” he  said and walked over to the counter with the slavers. When he returned to the booth he drained his mug.
“Leaving so soon, Master Robles?” the doorman asked them on the way out. “Something wrong?” 
“Nothing wrong, Neem. Nothing a little scouring won’t scrub out of the stools.” 
Neem raised his eyebrows. “Oh? Yes. Well, some smells are passing.” The man was Rubish and the way he wrinkled his nose as he glanced inside, it was clear he too had little love for these Orioles invaders. “But gold is gold.” 
“Yes it is, Master Neem,” Robles said, bowing. “Good evening.” 
Neem bowed. “The same to you Master Robles, and your friends.” 
They stepped on to the street.
A distant boom echoed up the valley. Foom!  A light, red fire, burst from a house deep within Menad’s heart. The flames twisted with black smoke, and poured into the night sky. Something had exploded down in Menad.
“Isn’t that where Master Lazoloth lives?” Non asked. 
“I don’t know--” said Tomrin. He had only been at the Master’s house once before. 
“It looks right,” Robles said, glancing over at Tomrin, an unusual seriousness lined his face. “So I would say it is.” 
“No,” Tomrin said. “Don’t try to shine me on. That has to be the apothecary’s again.” 
“He’s not,” Non said. “I can tell it’s Big Laz’s house. I’m sure of it.” 
Robles swung his pack over his back and took off running. Tomrin legs lurched as he hurried after. “I can’t believe it.”
“I know, I know,” Robles said without slowing. 
Tomrin’s body didn’t seem to register anything. He realized that he wasn’t afraid. He was numb. He ran detached, his mind disembodied. It was like this was all happening to someone else.
A Memory of Fire [?]
A memory from his youth, one Tomrin suppressed out of shame, came back to him again. 
He saw Master Davit Rickot, Rennly’s father, dying, burned up in the flames as they consumed the Ocrin carpentry shop. Now any fire burning out of control frightened Tomrin. The thought of it made him feel very uneasy at the smoke dancing up ahead. The billowing smoke glowed as it rose while houses hid the flames as the temple several streets removed towered up while the houses on the street, wooden buildings dry from the unseasonable spring, seemed ready tinder.
Fire bells tolled from the firehouse on Salud Street, and the courthouse bells rang as the street filled with gawkers. Constables ran rope to cordon rope off the street adhead, blocking them. 
“No through!” a constable shouted inarticulately from the line. Tomrin followed Robles closely, as he punched a way through the mass of people. 
“We are firecrew,” Robles told the constable.
The man began to raise the rope, but stopped. “Where are your badges?” he said. “And your gear?” 
Tomrin looked beyond the man to the burning house. Two green fire trucks pulled by massive horses, tall and brown, were pulling up on the southside past the Hall of Victory to a stop in front of the house. 
“The other houses could catch fire and you are asking for your badges?” Robles said. “If that happens, constable--” Robles folded and unfolded his arms. “That’s on you.” 
The man frowned and held up the rope. 
“You two are the firefighters,” Non said. 
Tomrin and Robles ducked under the line leaving him and the constable there. 
Firecrew [?]
Tomrin waited until he and Robles were out of earshot. “I’m not firecrew,” he said. 
“I was,” Robles retorted. “That’s good enough for both of us.” The grin he shot Tomrin was a sad one. As they neared the house, the question of the wisdom of following where Robles led skittered across Tomrin’s brain. They weren’t supposed here, and now they were in a mix of people, official men, constables, a Censor and firecrew.
The Censor was Rennly.  
The itch on Tomrin’s chest screamed at him to get away, to run, to hide. “What the feather are they doing here?” he muttered. When he realized the others included Fredick and Jan with Rennly. The three of them were standing with two Orioles men as they spoke with a stocky Rubish man in a green fire hat. 
“Marshal Tamerton,” Robles said, “What’s going on?”
Other men had jumped from the trucks. In teams of four they began pumping water onto the blaze. Gallons of water spewed from the lines connected to the massive brass pots hauled on the back of the green trucks. Two two-men teams holding the hoses warred with water swords as they sprayed the fire. 
“My men are killing this fire until I hear different—from the Emperor, or from a Daughter of Heaven’s Glory, or from Seasargus himself,” Tamerton said to him, but his words seemed spoken mostly at Rennly.
“I could have your interdicted,” Rennly said. “And you Robles, and Tomrin--I’m glad you’re here for this.” 
“This? What is this?” Robles said. “Is Master Laz inside? Have you two decided to take Fredick’s complaints into your own hands?” 
“He’s in there. He’s started this fire. Not us,” Fredick said. 
“He tried to kill us,” said Rennly. 
“He wouldn’t do that,” Tomrin said. “You’re talking nonsense.”
“Not unless he had something to hide,” Fredick shot back. 
“What does he have to hide?” asked Tomrin. “You attacked him and he beat you, now your revenge is to burn his place? For making you look a fool? That’s more likely what this is.” 
Rennly scoffed. “All I’m saying, Marshal, is exercise caution. Master Lazoloth is a dangerous man.” 
“Noted,” the marshal said. “But only firecrew should be here. I’d feel better if—” 
Fire broke a window and cut off his words. Lines of water shot in through the new hole as smoke boiled out. 
“Tamerton, we need to send someone inside to find Master Lazoloth.” 
The marshal glanced at Robles. “This isn’t a good idea, Robles. I know you’d be fine but—” 
“I’m not asking you to risk your own men, Marshal.” Robles pointed to himself and at Tomrin. “Us.” 
Tomerton nodded slightly, and turned and shouted. “Two coats!”
“I don’t know about this, Robles,” Tormin said. 
“You already saved Laz once today; I understand if you don’t want to have to save him again.”
Fog in the Air [?]
Robles pointed at Fredick. “It might be a good idea if you are not here when I return, especially if I’m a dead man walking.” 
Fredick stepped back at the vehemence of Robles’ words, but a young Rubish boy with the coats arrived.
“I don’t know the first thing about fires,” Tomrin said as he pulled on his coat. 
“You almost saved Rennly’s father,” Robles said and glanced around as if looking for Rennly. But Rennly and Fredick had stepped away to argue more with Tamerton, now retreated to his men.
Tomrin shrugged. He wasn’t sure if he shrugged because he couldn’t believe that or because of how much the coat weighed. “Strange things happen.” That was a statement as true as time and a fact even he could not stand to disbelieve. “I once promised myself I’d never do this again.”
“Feathers,” Robles cursed. “We can’t back out now.”
“I’m not backing out.”
Foregoing the hat offered to him, Robles pulled one from his pack. “Good. Because we really need to save Master Lazoloth now if we are going to.”
“Your own fire hat?” Tomrin asked.
 “Never know when it might come in handy,” Robles said. A fireman held out an ax and Robles and grabbed it and crouched down. “Let’s go; Master Lazoloth is waiting.” 
“I don’t know what I am doing,” Tomrin moaned, slouching down.
“Just stay low,” Robles said. “And don’t breathe the smoke.” 
Into the Fire [?]
Robles attacked the door with his ax. 
Kthug! Kthug! 
“Don’t breathe the smoke,” Tomrin muttered to himself as he followed Robles inside, his words lost in the crackle and howl of the fire. 
Horses, carved in ivory and running, sat displayed on a front dresser by the door. Smoke ran along the ceiling as fire licked the walls. Two painted horses on opposite walls already burned steadily while a painting of a white stallion on the far wall at the end of the hall wasn’t burning yet. It was the only thing not leaking smoke or covered in it.
Robles opened a closet. “Not here!” Robles’ voice came to him in a bit of an echo. 
The oven-like heat in the house beaded sweat on Tomrin’s forehead and the smell of smoke robbed the air of breathability. “We need to hurry,” he croaked. 
“We’re not splitting up,” Robles said. “That’s how people die!” 
“I’m saying we need to hurry!” They were both shouting to be heard over the fire’s roar.
Robles put a hand on Tomrin’s coated shoulder. “Steady, now. We’ll find him. We’ll find Master Laz. Don’t worry.”
As they headed up the flight of stairs to the second level, Tomrin began to lose hope. The smoke was thick and pushed them to their knees. It would certainly overmaster their efforts now as it boiled chest high down the hall, but the third door Robles opened, opened to a bedroom.
Master Lazoloth lay on the floor inside. 
True Death [?]
They crawled over to Lazoloth and crouched down next to him. 
Blood leaked from cuts where bits of steel and wood punctured his skin. A dark pool had formed under the man. Tomrin couldn’t understand it. Master Lazoloth looked dead-eyed up at the smoke on the ceiling. Robles touched his neck and Tormin glanced away as Robles shook his head. 
“Dead? Master Lazoloth dead?” Tomrin asked.
“Maybe, maybe not. That’s how smoke works.” 
“What are we going to…” 
Brown cylinders—the same as at the glass shop—but laying flat, lay stacked in the closet where instead of clothes hanging on hooks or equipment hanging Master Laz had his insurance and a rill of red fire leaked from one nozzle, spewing like blood.
“To what?”
“We should leave,” Tomrin said.
“What about Big Laz?” Robles said. 
“He’s as dead as Davit Rickot was.”
“No, he might not be.”
Tomrin bent and pried a flint striker from Big Laz’s dead hand. “He killed himself.”
“What?” Robles said. 
“We need to go!” Tomrin pulled on Robles’ shoulder and pointed at the cylinders. “We need to get out of here before they all go!” 
“We take him out!”
Robles seemed distracted. Tomrin pulled his face around to see into the closes. “Look!”
“Oh, feathers!” His friend’s voice sounded only a whisper over the flames. “Help me get him on my back!” He knelt down at Master Lazoloth’s head and reached back. “His hands!” Tomrin picked up the master’s arms and handed them to his friend, then like a bag of grain, Robles grabbed and hitched the old man over his shoulder. 
Tomrin wasn’t sure how, but his friend had a feral strength, a brute power of an Orish farmhand and the will of an iron prod to go with it. He stood in the smoke and staggered forward to fall, gasping for breath, but he pulled the master out of the room into the hall and down the steps.
He all but ran with him on his back to the front door.
A Ticking Bomb [?]
Only once on the street did Robles sag and not stand back up quickly. 
Firecrew ran to him as Tomrin bent over and peeled Master Laz’s blood-slicked body off of him. Tomrin shouted in Robles’ ear. “We have to get further away!” 
Tamerton was there with the others. Tomrin shouted at him. “Get away! Everyone get back!” In with the bottled gas there had been bottled air. If both gas and air were to go at once... “The whole block could go!” 
“Wha--?” The fire marshal tried to ask. 
The first explosion knocked the words right out of the man’s mouth. Woomph! 
The blast stiff armed Tomrin in the chest, but it was the second explosion that split the house. KACAHAK! Boards and timbers shot through the air above them. The entire second story disintegrated and the burning bits and shattered pieces rained down.
Robles began shouting and coughing. “Stop the spread! Stop the spread! The whole block might go!” The flaming bits had sailed to other houses and to the nearby apothecary shop.
The fire marshal gained his composure first it seemed, though he had his hands on his head, holding on his hat like a simpleton and shouting the same thing to anyone curious enough to ask for orders. “Don’t let the fire spread!”
Robles, however continued to shout, and cough and yell at everyone, even the marshal if he or they stopped to question him as he and they stomped the  flames and tried to snuff the danger all around the nearby houses.
Everyone but Tomrin and Master Laz.
A Danger Passed On [?]
Tomrin closed the man’s eyes with a finger.
The dead man’s chest where his shirt had blown open exposed an area above his silent heart. A ring of metallic scales glinted red in the firelight. The scales glinted and shined around an angry, half-healed wound. The strange Adaman woman, Margretta, from the courthouse had hinted at something connecting them.
Tomrin brushed the bloody rent in Master Laz’s shirt out of the way, and checked the button of purple flesh. Laz, too, used fire to burn his scales off it seemed. There was much Tomrin wished to ask him, not too late for that. Frustration built up inside Tomrin until he feared he might burst. He wanted to kill Fredick or himself or both. But violence would not make him whole. A bit of himself now lay dead on the street before him.
“What are you doing,” Rennly asked as he pulled Tomrin’s shoulder.
Tomrin snatched his fingers away and grabbed the ax handle as he stood, turning and staring at Rennly—and Fredick. The blond boy had not disappeared as Robles had ordered. Two other Orioles men stood with them now. Robles loped up, behind. The two new men wore vests and whips rested on their hips. Slavers.
Tomrin’s grip vibrated the ax. “You brought slavers into this, Fredick?” he said. An ax wasn’t a civilized weapon, but it was a weapon.
“Our runaways are our own business,” the stockier of the two slavers said.
“Cut off the dead man’s shirt,” the taller said. “We’ll see if he is one of ours.” 
“Master Laz was free!” Tomrin hefted the ax in his hands. “If you touch him...”
The shorter man pulled out his whip. “No Peregrine is free in the eyes of the gods.”
Robles who grabbed his ax. “Tomrin, don’t. “One man is dead here tonight. We want no more.” He coughed almost exaggeratedly into his hand. “I know I don’t.” He coughed again. “We nor our gods are blood thirsty.”
“We are civilized men,” Tamerton said, picking up Robles’s idea and parroting it back like a good leader. “Now that this man is dead, for love of all we find holy, no more must die here tonight.”
“We have the fire under control?” Tomrin asked.
“Yes,” Tamerton said. “The fire is under control.”
A Taste of It [?]
“The rest of you are a bunch of vultures,” Tomrin said.
The fat slaver turned to the taller one. “Wasn’t one of our boys known for his lip?” The man brushed his coiled leather whip against Master Laz’s body. 
“Stop it, now,” Rennly said, judging the Tamerton’s men. “Can’t you see this man was Marked by the demons? His body must be cleansed and disposed of properly. The gods saw a problem and the gods rooted it out.”
“Maybe the boy then?” the stocky slaver said. His mad eyes fixed on the ax in Robles’ hands. He was the kind that hated other Orioles that had gone soft. The man stared as if judging Robles’s will to use it. The taller man slapped him on the arm.
“Look,” he said pointing. “It is the Leviathan’s Mark. The man clearly manufactured this little display.”
“He or Fredick,” Tomrin said.
“I did not! Lazoloth has been manipulating all of us this whole time,” Frederick said.
“You wanted to take the shop—even the stuff that was in Lazoloth’s house?” Tomrin levied. “We’d never know if you planted the bomb.”
The short man’s whip slipped from his hand as he gasped. “Wah!” He was still staring like an idiot at the scales growing on Lazoloth’s chest.
His partner slapped his head. “Run your eyes, and not your mouth for a change, Sam.” 
The man crouched and picking up the whip. The way he clutched it to his own chest was like it now possessed some darker magic--as if the pain was not enough; it had to feel more painful.
Somehow it seemed it might.

By the Power of the Gods [?]
Rennly held out his hands and brushed the two men back. “By the Tree,” he said as if remembering to make the sign of the worldtree. His hand rose as if along its tall main trunk. “And the three, of  Freafrasus, of Resalus--” He swung his open hand around the branches and leaves of the tree in a loop before descending back down the trunk. “And Daedalus, and all those--” He waved his hand out over Master Lazoloth. “--and all those who now go before us into the second heaven. For those departed headed for the Lake of Fire, we pray for their deliverance from the demons and their servants on Enfernus or on Gearthrum, wherever they may be. By the gods.”
“By the gods,” others echoed.
No words came out of Tomrin’s mouth. His eyes locked on the smaller slaver. 
The man stared back with hate in his heart; he wanted dearly to use his whip. “I still think we should check the boy,” he drawled.
A clammy feeling inched up Tomrin’s fingers and headed for his heart. He feared he something was going to happen. 
Rennly turned to the man. “You were told to shut your mouth, Sam? That your name? I don’t care. Shut your mouth,” he said, his voice taking on a lilt. “From what I heard this man was like a father, and I know what a terrible thing it is to lose a father.” Rennly paused a second and glanced at Tomrin. The boy’s green eyes struck him as cruel and callous. “I know. I lost my own in a similar blaze.” 
“But he could be a slave,” the man persisted stoutly.
“You fool,” Rennly said, rounding on him. “I’ve known Master Ocrin since he and I were children and I know for a fact—” He glanced at Robles. “—Tomrin Ocrin is owned by the Emperor.”
“But--” 
“Maybe in other parts of the world!” Rennly said, loudly, “But no! Here the gods’ will be done. And I am their rod and their staff. I am their voice here, and if I say this one is a slave and that he is duly owned by the Emperor, then he is in the eyes of any slaver in this land or any other. Do not forget your place here or anywhere. For I speak for the gods. Their will be done!”
“One of you killed Master Lazoloth,” Tomrin said.
“No one killed Master Lazoloth,” Rennly replied. “He killed himself. I was here, Tomrin! I saw. Now you can take my word for it.” The boy sneered and razor sharp teeth appeared in his mouth like tiny white daggers. Rennly was the same vicious animal all those years ago. 
Tomrin saw it clearly for a moment and shuddered. It didn’t matter was said here. Rennly manipulated every situation and everyone. 
He hates me for knowing it.
Battle Lines [?]
“Men may never know the full story,” Robles said loudly. “And Master Lazoloth can speak for himself in the heavenly courts.”
“After so many years of sin,” said Rennly mused. “His purification will be some ordeal. Easier maybe for a Peregrine to live the years, the decades, with the scales, but now I’m almost tempted to believe maybe he was embezzling funds after all.”
“That was a lie, now as then,” Tormin couldn’t believe what he was hearing. “They are just going to keep coming after us.” 
“Maybe,” Robles said. “But Fredick isn’t that stupid.” He turned to Fredick and ground the ax into the street’s dirt. “He would be wise to let things be.” 
“Are you threatening me again?” Fredick asked. 
“I’m simply cautioning you that I am a citizen of this land. I will not light the gas. Will you? The shop is ours now. With Master Lazoloth dead, control comes to us.”
“You may be a citizen,” Fredick said, but he pointed to Tomrin. “He, however, he is still a slave.” 
“What are you doing?” Rennly said to Fredick. “This is not the time for fighting over the corpse of this man’s company. You are not in Zircos..”
Fredick turn to Rennly. “But this was all--” Fredick said.
“This! This is a mess on my street! On the gods’ street!” Rennly said, harshly cutting Fredick’s words. “I need it cleaned up!”
“But—”
Rennly scowled at Fredick. “But nothing! I’m not going to stand here and listen to you degrade yourself by arguing with a slave. How about you make yourself useful and have a constable send a wagon.” 
“Yes, of course,” Fredick said and bowed. He left for the cordon. 
The marshal clapped his hands and then pretended to take command. Robles and Tomrin were then asked to leave and return to the cordon with everyone else. “I should have never touched Fredick,” Tomrin said as he and Robles waited behind the cordon with Non for the wagon to take Master Laz’s dead body to the temple. “I don’t even know what I was thinking.”
“I don’t know about you, but I need some sleep,” Robles said.
“Yes,” Tomrin agreed. “There is nothing more we can do here tonight.” 
They left the cordon and Robles and Non peeled off until Tomrin climbed the eastern highway alone. When he came to Arcade Avenue, the soft welcoming light of the Winged Helm Inn beckoned with laughter and music, but he walked on, down Arcade.
He had the shop key in his pocket and needed to use it. Master Lazoloth was dead, but he still needed to fulfill the trust the old man had put in him. He needed to lock the shop. Moreover, he still had one last thing he needed to do before he could leave for Woolad in the morning. 
He needed to burn off his feathered scales.
Chapter 12: Out of the Furnace
	The heaven’s have them. Now, so do we.
		—From The Arcanist’s Cookbook, the forbidden precursor to The Arcanist’s Handbook

The shop door closed; from the back, the Scarab’s glass eyes grew dark.
Tomrin walked over and grabbed a length of thumb-width glass and slipped on his goggles over his eyes. Of all the sizes of glass, one size rod worked best. And molten glass worked the best of all the methods he had tried. He needed this glass shop, if for no other reason. 
“Right,” he said, trying to prepare himself.
He hoped one day he would find a better method than burning. Cutting off the scales made him bleed like a stuck goat, and still he needed to cauterize the wound. A bird chirp outside and Tomrin found it hard to focus.
Inside the mass twisted and writhed, like a snake coiled and bursting to get out. It’s not me, Tormin told himself. The evil wasn’t him. The last refrain of a childhood rhyme tracked through his mind as he spun the tip of the rod in the orange flame. Pinioned to the Shadow Line. 
The chime ultimately claimed the shadow line was imaginary but somehow just as real as the dark and light it seperated, an idea which might have made sense in his dreams, but now was as impenetrable as the depths of space above and which he might spy on with the scope when it was working.
“Feathered riddles,” he muttered to himself as he removed the glass rod from the flame, and sighed. “Forgot to take off my shirt.”
A Feeling [?]
He set down the glowing rod and pulled off his goggles. “I am out of it,” he said. His words spoken aloud filled the shop with an eerie presence but he knew that it was just in his mind as stared at the Scarab, the only other thing around, save for the glasswork god in the window. “Robles is going to have nothing to do with you tomorrow,” he told the thing. “And me just sitting here wasting time. I could be sleeping.”
With Master Laz dead his happy life was melting away. It was disappearing into the creeping shadows of the shop, like dripping blood covering his eyes. He let out a heavy sigh. He still had to do what he’d come to do. 
He walked over to the front door and checked it was locked. No one would be able to see exactly what he was doing from outside through the stained glass. The bubbles and waves in the glass were on purpose—to split the light and scatter it without being opaque. 
Tomrin wondered how many times Big Laz had done as he prepared to do now.
The Demon’s Brand [?]
Taking off his shirt he whipped it over his shoulder.
Tomrin could smell the smoke of Laz’ house on it. He walked back to his workstation. The man’s lifeless eyes flashed in the stars of Tomrin’s mind. “Feathers!” he swore to banish the sight. 
Dropping his shirt on his stool, he sat back down and picked up the glass rod with one hand. He lowered his goggles with the other. After a minute the flame heated the rod to a purple glow.
Tomrin’s fingers clamped the rod. His arms shook. “Do it!” he commanded himself. His words cast spit through his clenched teeth and his head wanted to split from the strain. His eyes wandered. This was going to hurt like the seven heavens and the nine hells combined! It always did.
Half-growling, half yelling, he pushed the red hot end of the glass into his chest and seared his flesh and scales.  A screech exited his throat and left his lips. “Eerrerrh!” The reek of burning skin and pain erupted from the wound as he pressed. He wondered if he’d pressed too hard this time.
It felt like the glass rod pierced down to his heart and burned it dead.
Flaming Heart [?]
Tomrin slammed the rod down on the bench. “Feathers!” he cursed as his hands cramped in fists. He stifled a yell as he caught himself finally coming through the initial pain.
A shadow moved outside the shop’s door. Someone knocked. Fump. Fump. 
“Open up!” It was a woman’s voice. A Daughter of Heaven’s Glory had found him. “I know you’re in there, Tomrin Ocrin.” 
Tomrin stood and quickly pulled on his shirt. Feathered feathers!
His pain kept him focused and  tried not to imagine Master Laz trapped like he was now. He pulled his stinky shirt down over his clammy skin, hiding the cauterized wound. He walked slowly to the door and unlatched the lock. Pushing the glass-encased lead with his right hand while his chest screamed at him. 
A hand from outside pulled the door the rest of the way open. “That’s how you open the door?” 
“You?” Tormin said. The Adaman woman from the court stood before him, holding the door open for herself. 
“And that’s how you address a lady?” she said as she stepped inside, brushing past him as if he were but a slave improperly opening the door for her. 
“The shop is not open,” Tomrin said sharply. He needed to kick this woman out so he could massage the area around the burn until the pain subsided. “You’ll have to come back tomorrow.” 
The woman turned to him, her dark figure a darker ghost in the star light. “You are awfully curt with someone who has just helped save you untold trouble, young man.” 
“Is that what you think?” Tomrin said. This woman was becoming quite a nuisance. “And I am not as young as I look, lady Margretta. The shop I’m afraid is closed.” He could be proper if he chose. 
“Ha,” she scoffed. “Is that so?” 
“Yes, when I cut my beard--” He was not the kind to use his scraggly facial hair as a deflection, but in the low light he supposed he looked fine. “We aren’t selling right now and we certainly aren’t buying.”
In the Shadows [?]
“Just close the door,” she commanded. “The hour is late.” 
“Yes, and I was just leaving,” Tomrin stuck his head out the door. Down the street the Orish Counselor waved to him, raising his hand in a gentle greeting. Tomrin waved back before grabbing the door handle and pulling it closed. “Not going to have your lawyer with you?”
“I’m afraid Marten is--” She smacked her lips. “--Overly protective.” 
“A welcome trait in a lawyer, I suppose,” Tomrin said. He felt he was doing well, not quaking in his boots, trapped as he was and in so much pain. “But, you say: The hour is late. You think you helped Master Laz, but no, he is dead.” 
“Dead?” She sounded surprised, and the starlight shifted on her cheeks revealed she was scowling. 
“He killed himself,” Tomrin added. 
“The fire and the explosion?” 
“Yes. And now because you didn’t actually save him, he’s dead.” 
Margretta scoffed again. “That choice was always yours.” 
Tomrin cooled. “You should go.” 
“Oh?” Margretta said. “You think it is that easy to get rid of me?” 
“I don’t know.”
She stepped closer and invaded his personal space. “You don’t know much.” Her eyes were dark pools as she looked down her nose at him. “I bet you don’t even know what your own name means, Master Tomrin.” 
“It means: happy is he who serves the gods,” Tomrin replied.
“Ha. Close, yet no,’’ Lady Magretta said. “The name Tomrin does not come from Old Silvan, but from Old High Orish, from the words: To-merl-in. Literally meaning the wise black bird.” 
An image from his nightmare flashed through his mind, and Tomrin glanced to the dark Seasargus in the window. “Not that one,” the woman said in a low voice. “The other one.”
“I do not believe in fairytales,” Tormin said. “Even if I am just a simple glass man.” 
“Really?” Margretta said and turned and walked over to the back bench where the torch gently purred. “Glass?” She held up the rod he’d used to burn the Leviathan’s Mark from his chest. “This is nothing then?” 
“Glass is not nothing,” Tomrin replied, and walked over to her and snatched away the rod from her hand. He waved it. “Glass is always more than glass to me.” 
“That’s deep,” she said. “And air is more than air, water is more than water.” 
Her insulting tone irked him. “You clearly don’t know the first thing about glass,” Tomrin said.
 Margretta bent and put her eye to the eyepiece. “Spying on Serathus is what you are doing with it?” 
“It’s not pointed at Serathus.”
“No, it’s not. I see nothing.” She bent back up. “But you could use it to spy on the heavens.” She pointed at him, or maybe at his chest. “Think. If you can see them, can’t they see you?”
A Forked Tongue [?]
Tomrin half-hummed, half-groaned; wound felt like she was jabbing him though she wasn’t even touching him. If she was a Dark Daughter she was certainly sent by demons to torment him. “Line of sight?” he said obliquely. “Why are you here?” Tomrin asked. He didn’t want to deal with the woman a minute longer. “You must know I’m not going anywhere with you?” 
“I’ve met fools less stubborn than you, Tomrin Ocrin. Your master is dead...as I hear from you, and now slaver trouble crawls all over Menad. This city is a dead cow rotting in the sun covered in ants, filled to the brim with maggots.”
“You have no argument from me, but I am heading home tomorrow.” 
“Leaving all of it?”
“By the time I return, they should be gone. I plan to make the shop better than ever for those that wish to work here.”
“Dreams are great, but your Master Lazoloth showed what happens when you run out of cold hard currency.”
“The Sapphire Front will pay us. Master Laz wasted money, I won’t.”
“So you are smarter than him?” 
“In some ways, yes.” 
The woman cackled. “And you think that makes you qualified?” 
“Why wouldn’t it?” 
“Look at you. Look at the color of your skin. I would say you have learned nothing. The races may live together in this town, but that doesn’t change the fact that old thoughts and old ways don’t die by themselves--especially when the gods themselves reinforce those ideas.” 
“The shop won’t hire people like Fredick anymore. I will hire people I, and Robles, and Non, and the others trust.” 
“So you do trust people, just not me? Or the emperor?”
Tomrin walked to the door, feeling her close behind him, mimicking his steps in the dark, making him feel awkward and self conscious. “I don’t know you, and I was just leaving.” He reached out to the handle. 
Her hand brushed his.
He pulled away. “Ah.” 
She held the handle as she spoke. “It’s just that easy for them to know,” she said. “Perhaps how they knew about your master?” 
“If they know about me why do nothing until now?” 
“Laz was old. Perhaps they thought to use him as bait.” 
“Great,” Tomrin breathed. 
“I don’t think I need to warn you that you are not as old and as broken down as your Master.”
“What?”
“That fact should factor into your own thinking.”
He rubbed his hand where she touched him, wishing she would leave so he could scream away the pain in his chest. “I don’t know anything about anything,” he said. “Other than this: I think you should go. It is late, and your lawyer friend is waiting for you. I think you said he was protective? He’s probably worried.”
“I said he was protective, yes,” Margretta replied, no menace in her voice, just exasperation as she moved around him. “But not of me. He worries about what will happen to you, should you come before the bar, and they get a load of you… The machinations.” 
Truth? [?]
“What machinations?” Tomrin said.
“There are facts you should at least try to begin to comprehend,” Margretta said slowly.
“A lecture?” Tomrin muttered. “I have a fuzzy memory of my last. Perhaps write it down?”
“Think of it this way: Two...” Margretta paused. “Two men. They were dressed in black and were waiting for you outside at your home. They were hiding, sneaking about. It seems an Orish slave thought he might have seen something earlier today and with a bit of tarks his opened his mouth real wide.” 
Tomrin didn’t want to believe what he was hearing. “Waiting?”
“Not anymore,” Margretta said. “Don’t worry. Marten has killed before.” 
“He said…” Tomrin replied, not knowing where to begin.
“It has been a while for him, though not the first man in black.” 
“He killed Censors before then?” 
“I didn’t say they were Censors,” Margretta replied coolly. “But if you worry what they might know… You might also worry that I and Marten can’t be everywhere. It was only a chance that he thought to check on you. Me, I don’t like to believe in chance. I certainly do not like to rely on it. Do you?” 
“No. I don’t.” 
She opened the door. “That is wise--the first smart thing you said today.” 
Leaving [?]
“And Tomrin,” she said. “Think about what I’ve said. There is much for you to learn. For you, even if you are as smart as you think. Maybe getting out of town will clear your head. As far as I can tell, you shouldn’t wait.” She slipped out of the shop, shutting the door behind her. 
Tomin put his back to the door as her opaque shadow receded through the gray glass of the tree. 
Tomrin rubbed his chest and swore. “Feathers.” 
Finally, he pulled the key from his pocket and he locked the door. Tich. He leaned back against the cool lead and rouch cut glass a moment. After a minute he pushed away and walked over to his bench. His torch still burned bright. He had been staring at it as it burned gas for no reason. Censors. Did they know? Those that did were dead--if the lady wasn’t lying.
Chapter 13: The Road to Woolad
	It is a burden to always keep up the facade, but if you value your life and those you love, you never lower it.
		—From the Living Book of the Dead

Tomrin cut the gas and the room fell into silent darkness as the halo of light on his bench disappeared into an after image. Making blindly for the back door he exited the building. Is this the last time? He pushed the door. Tuk. Double testing the lock, he headed down and around the alley to Arcade Avenue. Margretta and her man were gone. The street lay empty. The street came alive at the corner as patrons, those who lived elsewhere in the city, stumbled from the Winged Helm Inn. Tomrin avoided the light spilling from the door, and walked behind two Rubish men. They complained they’d spent too much money and slurred both the Orioles invaders and their speech. They turned down the highway and Tomrin turned up.
He glanced from shadow to shadow as the highway switched back and forth. The brittle, heat-killed bushes on the side of the road might have hidden anyone. He had sworn it had been Gaz he’d seen earlier in the day on his street, but that mystery seemed solved now. It hadn’t been Gaz. Now black clad men, if Margretta could be believed, had run into a terminal case of counseling. 
As his house neared, his heart began to pound. The gloom started only a few feet in front of him now and he imagined Censors lurking in the dark. His house loomed up over the street. A light flickered in the kitchen window. Why was Mistress Carl up so feathered late? Her shadow—or another’s—moved in the window?
 He touched the step with his boot and stepped up lightly. 
Retired [?]
Opening the door he stepped inside.
Mistress Carl emerged from the kitchen. He considered walking around her without saying a word. “It’s late again, Master Tomrin,” she said. The light from the kitchen illuminated her left side, tossing the right side of her face in shadows. 
“You shouldn’t have waited up for me,” Tomrin said, trying to hide a grimace of pain.
“Are you hurt?” 
“I’m just tired,” Tomrin said and began walking around her.
“Aren’t we all?” she said as he walked past her.
He headed for the stairs in the dark, leaving her watching after him. Entering his darkened bedroom, he closed the door and laid down. His head hit a stack of clothes, his clean laundry. He pushed the clothes onto the floor, before groaning to sit up. Pulling his boots off, he laid back down and undressed down to his small clothes, but left his shirt on. 
For a long while he lay in the dark staring at the black ceiling. Closing his eyes brought memories of Master Lazoloth lay on the ground dead, his gray hair singed and awry, his eyes staring blankly up at the stars…
An Old Darkness [?]
With fingers sharp as glass, a woman poked at him from the darkness. 
She jabbed his arms and stabbed his chest. She knifed him in the legs and he was powerless to move. Her needle-sharp claws stabbed him, and his rope-bound body jerked with each sharp prod, each painful poke. He struggled to find her in the dark, but a dizziness rocked him, like he was falling into an abyss and she jabbed and jabbed, unrelentingly. The darkness around him blinded him. Only shadows met him as he fell and all around, if there were flames, they were dark and if they flickered gave off no heat but sucked in light.
He tried to yell at the woman to stop, but he could say nothing as she cut him with her hardened nails and words honed to cut deeper. “You are a lie,” she crowed as she sank her razor-sharp fingernails into his right hip. 
Tomrin thrashed against the pain. Needles of pain ripped through him forcing him awake. His arms flailed and his knuckles slammed into the wall. Bruk! Of all his dreams this one was the first and worst.
He grabbed his hand. Feathers. The needles of pain were gone, but his barked knuckles hurt.
Morning’s twilight filled his room with a sullen gloom—and Tomrin with irritation. He bit the ripped flesh off one of his knuckles and swallowed the sickly skin after chewing, disbelieving the morning. He wanted to roll over and go back to sleep, but he had to get up.
He kicked his legs off the bed. Pain from his chest wound made him groan. “Gah!”
His eyes hurt from lack of sleep and he rubbed them despite them having no sleep-sand in them. “Feathers. It’s too early to be alive,” he muttered to himself and grabbed a pair of clean pants off the floor, his tan ones, just baggy enough to be comfortable and perfect for travel. 
He glanced at his pack in the corner near the door and sighed. Standing he walked over and grabbed his pack before walking back to his bed and sitting back down. He picked up his clothes and stuffed them all into the leather satchel. Enough for ten weeks. He was only going to be gone two days, maybe three, but he could feel an argument with Mistress Carl coming on and wanted to head it off. If she believed he was willing to move out, maybe she would try harder to keep him. He slipped his feet into his boots and laced up.
Standing, he slung his pack over his shoulder. He adjusted it but it still put pressure on his chest wound. Can’t helped it. He patted the papers in his pocket, checking them. Also in the pocket he found the brass shop key. Memories from the day before flooded back. Stomping out into the hallways, he headed down the stairs. Ben was nowhere to be found but Mistress Carl was in the kitchen. She blinked several times. “Leaving and its early enough for breakfast—” 
“I decided, I am heading home,” Tomrin said. He had no time for breakfast. Not enough to wait around for her to make it. “I forgot to mention.” 
“It was late.” She rubbed her hands on her apron. 
Tomrin ticked off a couple other reasons in his head. Master Laz dying, and Rennly, and Fredick—and Gaz. “Yes. It was late and I have a funeral tomorrow, and Sheep Shearing Days at home,” Tomrin said, changing the subject.
“And are you coming back here?” Mistress Carl said. 
“I don’t know,” he said. “Maybe I will find another place. I was going to ask Master Lazoloth, but he’s dead now.” 
“What?” Mistress Carl said. “Dead?”
“Yes, dead. I forgot to mention. It was late.”
“Dead?”
Tomrin headed for the door and opened it. “Yes, dead.” He left the house and closed the door behind himself, not waiting for another question.
Freedom [?]
A low hanging sun peeked over the rim of the valley. 
It has been months since Tomrin had seen the sun rise, and now the glare was right in his eyes, yet the morning air was brisk and welcome. As he made his way down the street he greeted those who greeted him. They were a fresher bunch than he was used to, men and women heading off to work seemingly happy to be alive at this hour. You should wake up earlier more often. The lack of heat itself was more than welcome. The Winged Helm Inn, however, never slept; now was no different. From the stables to the commons, grooms moved with the slow deliberate pace of too much tarsk the night before. Tomrin walked past, a wave for the porter on duty. 
At the glassworks, Non stood out front, again. Tomrin resisted the urge to call to him as he neared. There were others on the street, men and women, who worked in the various shops on Arcade Avenue. Their strides were filled with purpose. It wasn’t a strange hour for them to be in such a rush, even if it was for him. If only I didn’t hate mornings so much. 
“Morning,” Non said. “You’re here early.”
“Morning,” Tomrin replied, rubbing a bit of sleep from his eyes that he had missed. “I have the key.” He pulled the warm brass from his pocket and Non stepped aside. 
“It’s so strange, Master Lazoloth--and everything,” Non said. 
Tomrin slid the key into the keyhole on the glassdoor. “I know.” He turned the key. Chict. He opened the door looking at the gray tree of glass itself so near the color of lead. “It feels so wrong.” 
“But it will be nice not having to deal with Fredick.” 
Tomrin held the door open and followed Non inside. “True.” 
Non suddenly stopped and bent down. “Umm this doesn’t look good…”
Grave News [?]
Tomrin stepped inside around Non. “What?” he asked, closing the door.
Non handed him a letter. “Post in the middle of the night?” 
The letter had been dropped into the mail slot between the window and door and had missed the bin. Tomrin tore open the envelope and extracted the letter. The greeting was from the undersecretary of the Sapphire Front. The letter went on for a moment before coming to the point at the end:
...as such, we are no longer interested in the opera glasses you are proposing.
Tomrin sucked in a breath and let it out. “I don’t think we can keep the shop open.” He handed the letter to Non. 
“But you got it working?” Non said.
“It doesn’t work perfectly.” 
“But--” 
Tomrin ran a hand through his hair and pulled at the nape of his shirt, his chest tight. “The question is, do you want to cut glass?” 
Non made a face. “No. I’d rather take over Fredick’s work.”
“For no money?” Tomrin said. “Cut glass is all that we have that pays now.”
The door opened and Robles, Ken, and Tiff entered. “The shop is dead,” Non blurted. He handed Robles the letter, who read it quickly and handed it to Ken. 
“Well, Master Lazoloth is dead,” Ken said. 
“We can’t live on no money,” Tiff said.
“You have children,” said Robles. “No one can expect you to work for free.” 
“So so we have jobs or not?” Ken asked. 
“No pay--for now,” Robles said. “But Tomrin and I can fix that. There are golden ducks everywhere.” 
“But I’m afraid it’s going to be awhile,” Tomrin said. “The Sapphire Front isn’t going to pay us not until we find a way to convince them again. That’s going to take time.” 
“We’ll find money,” Robles said. “But for now we need to save as much money as we can.” 
“We need to firedown the forges while Tomrin and I head to Woolad for a couple days. We will look for money there.” 
“We really can’t work for nothing,” Ken said. “Even we are at our limits.”
“Let’s close the shop for a couple days. Then when we return we will see where we are,” Robles offered. 
Tomrin couldn’t help but feel that they were leading the man on. Tiff looked like she didn’t believe it either. “We can’t work for free.” 
“We’ll get the money,” Robles assured her. “Now let’s get the place closed down.” He directed the cleanup.
When Dar and Sean from the back arrived Tomrin explained to them the plan. 
“We just thought that Master Laz was innocent, but--” 
“I understand,” Tomrin said. “They pressured you to go along.” 
The two nodded sheepishly.
Dynamics [?]
“You didn’t need to rag on them,” Robles said after they returned from lunch and it was just the two of them at their workstations.
	“What? Who?” Tomrin said.
	“Sean and Dar.”
“Do you trust them?” Tomrin asked him. Dar and Sean were Peregrine yet…
“Yes,” Robles said.
“Is the shop clean?” Tomrin asked, changing the subject. As far as he was concerned he gave Sean and Dar what they deserved.
“Close.”
“Time, then?” Tomrin said. He and Robles headed into the back. The heat was still there, but the various glows leaking out of the glass furnaces were softer. Rounding everyone up.”
“Come back soon,” Tiff said.
“Yes, with money,” Non added to laughs.
“I’m sure we will have great barrel loads of golden birds on our backs when we return.”
“And the percents?” Sean asked.
“We will figure all that out,” Tomrin said. 
“So we are really doing this then?” Tiff said. 
“Yes, we are doing this,” said Tomrin. The idea of going begging for a new job was no better than begging for investments. He didn’t think he could live with the idea of working in a lesser shop, cutting glass from colored sheets. 
“Then Tomrin is the new master now?” Ken said.
“Yes.” 
“No,” said Robles, turning. “Not yet.” 
“That’s fine,” Tomrin said. “All I care about is the glass.” 
“Of course,” Robles said. “But if any of us leaves the shop, we lose our percents.” 
“That’s only fair,” Tomrin said. “We are all in this together.” He was glad Robles was the one to make that rule. His friend was the one most likely to grow bored and leave.
“Now,” Robles said as he glanced at the door. “Now it’s time for me and Tomrin to hit the road.”
“And be sure to lock the back door and latch it we you leave tonight,” Tomrin added. “We will have the key.”
On the Road [?]
Now was not the time for travel at all.
“I don’t even want to go,” Tomrin said, locking the door gingerly. The handle was blazing hot.
“You sort of have to go…for Gaz’s funeral.” Robles said, taking the key and tucking it into his pack. “So we don't lose it.”
“Don’t you hate the idea of seeing Rennly again?”
“Not at all,” Robles said. His knife flashed into his hands. “Sheep Sheering Days was all fun at the fair.”
“Even if Rennly is there?”
“Yes, I suppose so? Worried for your toes?” Robles turned and took a step up the hill towards Tomrin’s home in the city—and nominally towards Woolad, their hometown.
“Wait!” Non called. “So you are the Flight Leader, Robles?” 
“No, I’m the Pack Leader,” Robles said as he hitched his pack to his shoulder. 
“I guess that makes Tomrin…”
“I am the King Bird of Glass.” 
“And you two are coming right back with money?” 
“We’ll be back as soon as possible,” Robles said.
Non turned and headed back into the ally.
Tomrin shrugged and followed him, hitching his own pack to adjust it.
Fighting Words [?]
“I don’t think this is a such a good idea,” Tomrin said to Robles when they finally crested the valley Menad was in onto the rolling prairie lands. The climb out of the valley was slow, hot work, each switchback dragging them closer to the sun as it beat down. “It will be good not having to deal with dead weight like Fredick dragging us down. But, what of Tiff and Ken? I can’t help feeling we are leading them on. Sean and Dar have families too, you know?”
“I know that,” Robles grunted. “Life is a gamble.”
“For us, maybe,” Tomrin said. “But we can’t do that to them.”
Robles shrugged. “If you are worried so much, ask your father for money.”
“My father? He didn’t become rich giving away money to people--even some he owed.”
“What’s the worst that could happen?” Robles asked.
“I don’t know,” Tomrin said. “I feel like the worst has already occurred.”
“Master Laz dead?” Robles asked. “You don’t plan on following in his footsteps do you?”
Tomrin’s hand itched to rub his chest. “Hardly. And I also don’t plan to help you lead us all to ruin.”
“Them’s fighting words,” Robles said, stopping, and turned and headed to the side of the road.

Mixed Sticks [?]
The road entered a small patch of conifers, the stand hiding houses and farms piling up against the Eastern Highway--and tired, hot slaves.
Tomrin took the rough hewn walking stick Robles offered him. The dry bark flaked in his grip. Robles raised a similar cutting. He made several playful jabs at Tomrin with his dead branch. “Defend yourself,” he said and forced Tomrin to deflect his next jab with his scaly staff. Clack.
“If Sean’s babies go hungry…” Tomrin said, but Roble’s high swing forced him to focus or be struck in the chest.
“No one is going to starve,” Robles said. “We’ll succeed, as long as you try.” He swung low.
Tomrin pushed his stick down too slowly and Roble’s tick slapped him in the leg. Clack.
“Me?”  Tomrin demanded, backing up, hopping from the smart. “You’re the one who can’t seem to hold down a job for more than a few months.”
Robles pressed his attack. Clack. Clack. “I can hold them just fine… if I want to.”
“And you aren’t going to run out on us?” Tomrin asked, swinging his stick, missing wilding as Robles arced his body lithe as whip.
“No. Are you?” Robles said.
“No,” Tomrin said.
“Good,” Robles said, grinning, dropping the butt of his walking stick to the ground. “And we’re all happy for that--and that you are better at glass than your are at mixing stick like you used to.”
Tomrin flipped the wooden limb in his hands. “This is hardly a proper staff.” He swung low at Robles’ legs.
Robles jumped, pulling his stick up with him. “Now, that’s more like it,” he said. “Now you are getting into the spirit of Sheep Shearing Days.” 
Tomrin scoffed. “It’s been forever since I enjoyed a single thing about that feathered thing.”
A Touch of Tarsk [?]
“What about the food?” Robles demanded, incensed; he swung low now too.
Tomrin blocked him easily. Clack. “Sheep Shearing Days is kid’s nonsense.”
“The childish fun is the point.”
“We’re not children anymore,” Tomrin said whirling. The dry road puffed dust up from where his booted feet slapped the dirt. The bone dry road had been ground to a fine powder, dust even a heavy rain would not easily penetrate. 
“True,” Robles said, swinging his branch at Tomrin’s chest. Tomrin turned and caught the stick with his shoulder instead. Chut. He swung himself and stick, striking Robles. Frack. They both made hits. One point each. Robles took a breath, dropping stance. “And we are going to have to act it now—if we want money.” 
Tomrin scoffed, slapping it from under him. “Like us fighting in the road instead of getting out of this feathered heat?” His chest wound ached and thirst settled now. “We’re sweating for no good reason. We should have brought some water.” 
Robles ignored him and swung. Clack. Clack. “You know what I mean,” said Robles, setting the point of his stick in the dust. “Like being willing to cut glass--and beg for money.” 
Tomrin leaned on his own stick now. His feather chest burned. “And mount the glass too?” 
“Is that where you draw the line?” Robles asked, holding his stick to the ground, but half-cocked.
“I just hope the glass shop will be leaner now.” 
“We’ll still need the money,” Robles said.
“Money is nothing but a pain in the tailfeathers,” Tomrin said, pretending to adjust his pack.
Robles swung his stick up, dragging a cloud of dirt and dust into the air. The dirt, dust, and branch end flew at Tomrin’s middle. His father had wanted him to be good at staves and some of the training kicked in as the stick in his own hand lept to intercept Robles’s. Clack. His staff then smacked him across the waist. Fump. But there was no way of getting out of the dirt’s way. Sand and pebbles pelted Tomrin even as he scored the hit. 
“You dirty dog,” Tomrin said. “You could have hit my eyes.” 
Robles laughed. “Only if you didn’t still have it.” He rubbed himself where the staff had struck him. 
Tomrin dropped his stick into the dust “A nip of your tarsk,” he said. “Then we will call it even.” 
Robles dropped his own stick and shrugged his pack from his back. “I’m not sure that’s how it works,” he said, but began undoing the straps. He reached in and pulled out his glass flask. The bottle was of a brilliant green glass. He unstopped it and took a sip. “Ahh,” he said, offering it to Tomrin. “High-spirit tarsk.” 
Tomrin took the flask. “I thought I meant real tarsk.” 
“Just drink it,” Robles said. “It will warm you up.” 
Tomrin took the bottle. “That’s just what I need.” He put the flask to his lips and took a swig. “Gah! It’s harsh.” 
Robles snatched the bottle away and corked it. “Not harsh. Strong.” He stuffed the bottle back into his pack and rebuckled the straps. Hoisting the pack onto his shoulders, he picked up his stick and stood. “Now let’s go before we’re truly thirsty.”
Tomrin groaned.
“What is this?” Robles asked. 
“Just sore,” Tomrin said. 
“It’s that drubbing I gave you.” 
“I’m sure that’s what it is,” Tomrin said, dismissively. 
“Just the price of my inglorious company.”
A Snake in the Road [?]
The sun began to drop in the west and Tomrin supposed his parents would already be home, returned from the lower steppes lands, back to the last gasp of civilization--if Woolad could be called such.
The Ocrin’s carpentry shop had burned to the ground. It wasn’t much after that, that the family had left Woolad to wander the steppes, off searching for a feather. Herding goats and sheep and oxen was no life for Tomrin. His mother, Janet, believed in the old ways. His husband, Dabel, seemed to accept them too now--perhaps penance for the unseemly wealth made from the insurance.
“You know what I find odd?” Robles said. “Master Laz dies and just like that, the Sapphire Front cancels their order. I can’t help but feel Rennly did something to make that happen. Him, Fredick, both at the Inn, then Rennly was skulking around the courthouse yesterday. Then at Master Lazoloth’s house...”
“You saw him at the courthouse too? And I thought the same, but I don’t know,” Tomrin said. He suspected Margretta, the shadowy lady from the courthouse.
“If it was him, I think—”
Tomrin cut him off. “I know...we need to keep away from him.”
“No. Not at all,” Robles said, giving him a look. “It’s always better to watch your enemies. Never let them stab you in the back.” 
Tomrin pondered his friend’s words as they walked along in silence. 
Woolad appeared in the distance as they crested the hill of Turtle Pass. “Finally,” Tomrin grunted. 
“Welcome to Woolad,” Robles said, sarcastically. “Land of old slaver ways.”
Chapter 14: Woolad
	Never forget these famous last words: I know how fire works.
		—From the Archanist’s Cookbook

A fresh coat of whitewash covered the logs of the Country House Inn. 
The wooden bears out front had been carved from large tree stumps, once charming and rustic, now were also painted white, making them look off and wrong, and less imposing. The common house was detached from the guest rooms which had been built to look like farmhouses, and the false fronts on the stables made them look larger from the highway, while the outhouses were rough-hewn and squat, fashioned long ago to look like slave quarters. 
"Sure you don’t want to stay with me at my aunt’s?" Robles said, eyeing the white bears skeptically.
Tomrin thought about Robles’ question. He didn’t much like Robles’ aunt, not that she was a bad person, she just wanted to know things. “No, I think I will do this,” Tomrin said. "Get a drink with me?” 
“No, I better run home. Aunty will need to prepare herself for sleep. Me being late will tax her heart. You know how she is, how she likes to worry.” 
Tomrin grunted. “See you later tonight?” he asked. 
"I might head down for a drink. If not, I’ll see you at the funeral in the morning.” 
“Then we look for money.”
“Lots of old money comes into town,” Robles said. “Hate to say it but you are right, Gaz died at a good time for us.” Robles made a lopsided grin. "Don’t run off and get the constables called.”
Tomrin tossed his walking stick into the ditch beside the road. “I won’t."
"Well that’s good to know, a real load off my shoulders,” Robles said. “Just what I need: Founder in the jail in Woolad. You know?” 
Tomrin sighed. "I didn’t hit Fredick.” 
Robles tossed his own ratty walking stick into the ditch. “Never said you did. I better go.”
“Same,” Tomrin said and crunched his boot across the gravel walkway to the commons.
The door stood open but no one acted as porter and there was no music, though snatches of laughter from the back reached his ears as he entered. A front room which adjoined the hallway to the right stood empty. Usually someone manned the front counter. Not today. On the counter, a brass bell sat on a wooden stand, a slat of cedar.
Words were carved into it.
RING FOR SERVICE [?]
He knew the sign and stand but Tomrin had never rung the bell. Now, he reached to pick it up, but pulled his hand back as a shadow darkened the door behind him. 
Boots struck the floor and he turned around. “Rennly,” he said. 
“I just rode in,” Rennly said pleasantly. He had a Daughter with him. There could be no mistake.

She was Rubish and wore green silk. Her necklace held three jewels, three clear diamonds as white as stars. Her red face was flush from the sun, and her dress shone like leaves. She was as beautiful as she was dangerous. “Robles---I and Robles—” Tomrin stammered. “We just got here.” 
“You know this boy?” the woman said to Rennly. 
“Yes?” Renely grunted at her dismissively, adding to Tomrin, "Robles is here? I just see you." He walked to the counter and picked up the bell “You rang, right?” 
“Uh, no—was going to.”
Tomrin refused to look at the woman as Rennly ran the bell. Clang. Clang. Clang. The tall Orioles next to him set the bell down. “The new owners,” Rennly said, and shook his head. “Better but—” 
The door to the left opened and a man several years their senior walked out with an apron on. "Censor Rickot,” the man said as he wiped his hands on a towel. "You have arrived." 
"I keep my reservations, Master Fenway.” Rennly glanced at Tomrin. “And my promises.” Renny smiled. “I promise you that.” 
Words spoken long ago skittered through Tomrin’s mind. I promise you that. Rennly had the same gleaming teeth, the same granite face and hands. Tomrin’s chest began to throb.
Rennly glanced to the man behind the counter and Tomrin glanced away to Master Fenway as he flipped through the file in a metal box he retrieved from behind the counter. “Yes of course, Censor,” Fenway said, as he pulled a slip of cardstock from the case. “Yes, I have you for tonight, but it is a single room.” The man glanced at Tomrin. 
“What about me?” Tomrin asked him. 
“No rooms for slaves, I’m not even allowed to put you up in the outhouses.” The man laughed. 
“What?” Tomrin said. “I’m not a slave.”
“Apologies...” [?]
The man thumbed through his files. “...but unless you are Master Ithus Calway...” 
“No, I’m Tomrin Ocrin.” 
“Well in that case, Mister Tomrin,” the man said, looking back up. “No reservation.” He shrugged. “No room.” 
Tomrin began sweating. “What am I supposed to do?” 
“I don’t know,” the man said. “You know Sheep Shearing Days starts tomorrow?” 
“Yes,” he replied. 
“And I’m sure it’s not just because you’re Peregrine,” Rennly said. “Though you are.”
The Daughter tittered at his stupid joke while the man behind the counter sputtered. “No, not at all. I have many Peregrine friends.” 
“Don’t get all bent out of shape, Tomrin,” Rennly added. “It’s not Master Fenway’s fault you were too lazy to send him a letter asking for a reservation.” 
The man behind the counter shrugged, and Tomrin felt a fool in front of him, and the woman. He just wanted to leave, to disappear. “Well, thank you anyway,” he said quickly. “I’m sure I will find something.” He hurried out the door, hoping he would catch Robles. 
A night at his friend’s aunt’s didn’t seem so bad.
Even the food smelled muddled, Tomrin assured himself as he left the Country House Inn. Like heartburn and unfulfilled hopes. 

As he passed by the fairgrounds he searched the wagons and tents for his family, or any familiar face or sigil; the flat flute of the Ocrin family design appeared on one of the wagons. Don’t stop, Tomrin told himself, and walked down the street down towards Robles’ aunt’s place. He didn’t want his friend to come looking for him at the Country House Inn and not find him. 
He headed up a side street, past the row of houses, to the one where she lived and climbed the steps and grabbed the brass knockers. Picking it up, he let it drop. Tunk. Tomrin dropped it twice more. Tunk. Tunk. Motion and boots on floorboards came from inside. 
Robles’ welcome grin peeked through the high placed windows of the door and disappeared.
The door swung open, and Robles bowed. “Welcome, traveler! Welcome,” he said, swinging his hand. “Enter, my goodman.” 
Tomrin entered the house. “Thank you. Thank you.” 
The place was a good deal smaller than the others nearby, but it had more land out back with a shop covered in tin siding. “Aunty, look who’s here—it’s Eggy.” 
“Buggy!” Robles’ aunt said. She was sitting at the dining room table.
A large carpeted chair split the front room from the dining room and was filled with clothes and books and bags overflowing with paper.
The table itself was just as cluttered. A pair of boots stood in the middle of the mess that hid the table top. Eggy, Toady, Buggy, Robles’s aunt seemed to have a new nickname for Tomrin every time they met, but Buggy she had used before. 
“Good evening, Cordelia,” Tomrin said. “Sorry to call so late, but I wasn’t able to find a room at the Country House Inn. No reservation.” 
“Well, of course you couldn’t,” Cordelia said. She launched into an explanation as to who exactly the new owner of the Country House Inn was, and how he came to be so peculiar as to paint the bears white. 
Tomrin groaned to himself as she began mentioning the man’s relations. Tomrin didn’t care a bit, and it wasn’t like he was going to be staying there. “Hmm. Yes. Ah,” he said in all the right spots. “I just came by to let Robles know I wasn’t going to be there.” 
“So where are you staying?” Robles asked. 
“My parents are in town,” Tomrin said. “I will stay with them, I guess.” 
“I saw your sister and father earlier,” Cordelia said. “All I can say is your poor mother, Buggy. Your father is a card. And your sister, Buggy. Your sister?” She didn’t wait for Tomrin to answer but trampled him under the horse’s shod of her words. “Now, there is a fine looking girl. She has turned into an angel from the gods. Like meeting up with an angel and a demon seeing your father and sister together. I swear the years haven’t touched your father a lick, and he hasn’t grown up a bit. Not a bit.” 
“Yes,” Tomrin said, not knowing what else to say. Cordelia wasn’t wrong. His father was a bit of a cad. “I was thinking about—” Tomrin cut himself off. Robles’ aunt didn’t like Robles drinking tarsk. 
“What?” 
“Oh, nothing. I was just thinking I better be going,” Tomrin said. “I haven’t stopped to see my family yet.”
The Kings of Woolad [?]
“We are kings of this place,” Robles told his aunt, planting a quick kiss on his aunt’s cheek. “Who would dare rob us here? And don’t wait up for me.”
“I won’t,” his aunt said. “Just don’t be long. Remember, I am leaving the door unlocked so you can get in.”
Robles shook his head and turned to Tomrin. “I’ll walk down with you.” He left his pack in the corner and now the sun was setting.
 “I need a drink,” Tomrin said.
“True,” Robles said, but that wasn’t what he suggested as they walked. “This is going to be harder than we thought.” 
“What do you mean?” 
“My Aunty says money has dried up with the Woolad creek.” 
“It can’t have disappeared completely.” 
“No, that’s true, but everyone, and not just the misers, are holding on to every copper.”
“Well if we don’t have someone big on board, we are going to have nothing. Does your aunty know anything about that?” 
“Her exact words were: The generous are acting frugal, and the frugal are like misers, and the misers like the sky this year with it’s rain.” 
“So the plan is ruined?”
“No. Not ruined,” Robles said. “Only harder than we expected.” 
A Dangerous Man [?]
Robles waved hello to Master Stockling and his wife sitting on their porch watching the sunset. Tomrin had ignored them on his first time up the street, but waved to them awkwardly now as well. 
“We will have to look further afield is all,” Robles continued as they turned down Fairway Lane. On one side of the street was the city park, and on the other side the fairgrounds, beyond which the campgrounds where the tents and wagons gathered on King Street. 
The park was filled with as many booths and tents as the fairgrounds with its pavilions erected next to the permanent building, all spreading their shadows now. 
“And take more risks,” Tomrin said.
“Perhaps,” Robles allowed. The sound of animals in the pens reached them over the mostly quiet fairgrounds—and the occasional shout. Robles stopped in front of a closed gate. 
“I don’t know,” Tomrin said, as he eyed the closed gate. “I don’t like risk. Risks were what got Master Lazoloth in trouble--and then dead. I don’t want to end up like him.” 
Robles walked to a section of the fence meant to keep carts and wagons out. A simple heavy rope hung between the posts. He ducked under and held it up for Tomrin to do the same. “I doubt we will end up dead. Unless… You aren’t thinking of killing yourself?” 
Tomrin ducked under. “No.”
“Well, good.”
He wasn’t worried about killing himself, but Tomrin understood why Master Laz had; he clearly didn’t want to be purified. Tomrin’s own Leviathan’s Mark was regrowing, slowly, but far too soon the budding evil would necessitate burning the scales off yet again. 
The mass, he could feel it inside his chest. And unless Lady Margretta couldn’t be trusted at all, others could feel it too—if they touched him. He rubbed his chest. “You don’t think we could get into trouble, tromping through here?” he asked. The lanes and paths through the buildings and tents were paved with white quartz gravel and glittered where the sun peeked through. 
Robles grunted. “No. How would anyone know we don’t have animals entered?” 
“That’s true,” Tomrin agreed. Though lying courts an ill fate, the last thing they needed. 
Roblw did not head straight through the fairgrounds to the campgrounds on the other side, but to a long pavilion, the knife toss tent. Inside sat two large bales of golden straw, bound and tied lengthwise. Painted bulls’ eyes spotted each. In front of the round targets, the ground was marked with ropes laid out at ten, fifteen, and twenty paces. “Now, this is probably against the rules,” Robles said. “Practicing here.” 
His knife flashed into his hands and he stepped to the twenty pace mark. Fizt-futh. The blade buried itself, down to it’s hilt in the right-hand bale’s painted bull’s eye. 
“I don’t know how knife tossing is even legal,” Tomrin said as Robles walked down the alley to collect it. 
“Missiles are only illegal, if they have launchers.” 
“I know, but you are just as deadly. Your arm is the launcher.” 
Robles tucked his blade away. “What can I say?” He grinned, glancing at the setting sun. “I’m a dangerous man.”
The Net Closes [?]
“Let’s get out of here,” Tomrin said and turned and made Robles catch up to him. “I need to find a place to sleep tonight with my parent’s still.” 
“Your old tent?” 
“I’ll have to set it up in the dark,” Tomrin said, headed south towards the camp grounds. “That is if they brought it.” 
“Oh, here is the sparring ring for the staff competition,” Robles said as they turned down one of the paths. “They moved it this year.” He walked over to a barrel stuffed with sticks, regulation staves for the matches. He pulled one from the wooden barrel and tossed it to Tomrin, pushing the center, causing it to wobble slightly as it flew. 
Tomrin caught the staff with his right hand but the thing slapped his palm, a painful strike. “Ah!” It was little more than a heavy gray bar in the twilight. If it was like those cut in previous years it had been recently harvested from a grove on the Gorkel’s family farm. They ran the competition for as long as Tomrin remembered, since the start of the festival--or so they claimed. The yew wood was nothing like the bark covered walking stick from earlier. 
He swung the staff through the air. Whoorf. “Now this,” he said. “Is a civilized weapon.” 
A woman’s voice, low and dulcet, spoke from behind him. “Is it, now?” 
Tomrin swung around. Rennly and the woman with him from the Country House Inn walked up an ungraveled sidepath. Tomrin brushed his left hand against his chest as he deftly dropped the butt of his staff to the ground. “I would say it has always been one, Daughter.”
He couldn’t help but feel that Rennly was following him, even though the two of them came from the opposite direction.
A Civilized Weapon [?]
The woman turned to Rennly. “You will fight him in the competition?”
The way she touched his arm, Tomrin could tell their relationship wasn’t strictly professional. “No,” Tomrin said quickly. “I have given up fighting.” 
“We’ll see about that, won’t we?” Rennly said. “There is still plenty of time to change your mind.” He seemed to brush aside the refusal as if it were nothing. “Ah, Robles, here too I see, I don’t think you have met Daughter Calena.”
Robles bowed. “Robles Kodragus, at your service.” 
“Seems you have changed your mind yet again, Robles.” Rennly said, raising an eyebrow.
“I have changed my mind about many things,” Robles replied. “I am not so enamored with any one of my thoughts as to let them control me. But, which of them specifically are you referring to?” 
“That is a staff in your hand?” 
“Oh this?” Robles said, lifting another staff from the barrel. “This is just a stick to me.” He dropped it back down with a thud. Cunk. “I prefer something a little sharper, a knife say? Why do you think I am so drawn to glass? When it breaks it is sharper than any blade or knife. Blunt things are more Tomrin’s area of expertise.” 
“Probably just as well. Were you signed up there would only be a coin-flip’s chance you’d show up.” 
“Never know what else may happen,” Robles said. “One can’t run his fun and games like a slave ship, can he?” 
“Maybe you can’t,” Rennly said, swatting Robles’ words from the air with his right hand. “But Tomrin here is used to being a slave.” 
“Look, you’ve angered him,” the Daughter said, holding out a hand towards Tomrin. In the descending darkness her hand seemed charged with lightning, and his anger at Rennly evaporated. The blood rushed from his face, and his hands both tingled. He couldn’t run, so he stood transfixed holding the staff as he stared fixedly at her hand. 
Gloom darkened the fairgrounds, and the shadows of dusk loomed up the sides of the nearby tents, and suffused the walls with a darkness to cradle the world in a dark hand. At the center, Daughter Calena glowed. 
She knows? But she couldn’t. In the quick pause, he considered her outreached hand, now only a dark shape in the fading daylight. Tomrin gripped his staff with both hands. He bowed, positioning it horizontal in front of himself. “I take no offense at the truth,” he said. “I am but a Peregrine and slave, the Emperor is my master, and after Gaz’s funeral I will be heading home to Menad. No time for fun for me.” 
“You wouldn’t leave town just like that?” Rennly said. “The fair was always Gaz’s favorite time, to leave like that dishonors his memory.” 
“And you say the staff is a civilized weapon?” the Daughter said. “Is that even a thing?” 
“Civilized as weapons go,” Tomrin said. He didn’t want to continue talking to Rennly, and was surprised he prefered speaking with this woman, this Daughter of Heaven’s Glory. 
She made a small noise. “Hmm?”
“He’s always been like this,” Rennly said.
“Like what?” Tomrin asked. 
“Slippery with words—when you are hiding,” Rennly said. “Hard to pin you down; you always seem to have some excuss when you want to get out of something.” 
“I’m not sure what you mean,” Tomrin said. “But I refuse to believe you are calling me a liar. I don’t like weapons, and that’s the truth.” 
“I’m afraid Tomrin is just too idealistic,” Robles said. “I think he likes to use words in ways that don’t make sense...maybe that’s it?” 
“I try to be precise,” Tomrin said. “Not my fault people can’t follow me.” 
“I think you forgot something,” Robles said. “We are also looking for money for the glass shop after Gaz’s funeral.” 
“True,” Tomrin said. He’d forgotten in the moment.
Machinations in the Dark [?]
“So you are looking for money to keep the glassworks open?” Rennly asked, sounding interested. 
“What glassworks?” the Daughter added. 
“Godly Glassworks,” Robles said. “We are taking over where Master Lazoloth left off.” 
“So that glass shop and that Master Lazoloth?” Calena asked pointedly. “Doesn’t sound so godly to me.” 
“Master Lazoloth made mistakes,” Robles said. 
“Mistakes? He was Marked,” Rennly scoffed.
“Yes. But we aren’t,” Robles said. 
“And the work we are doing is important,” Tomrin added. 
“Oh really?” the woman said. “How so?” 
“It’s hard to explain how important glass is,” Tomrin said. “Everyone thinks it is just sand—heated up until it melts—but it’s so much more than that. How far we can take it? What can it do ultimately? No one knows for sure. But I think we have only just begun to scratch the surface.”
“He sounds like an arcanist on Serathus,” Daughter Calena said to Rennly. 
“Yes,” the Orioles censor said. “Very interesting. Glass. And you say you need money? And here is Calena and I. She is the new Vault Keeper.” 
“Congratulations, Vault Keeper,” Robles said. “But I doubt the Golden Hearted would be happy to find his gold with us without his permission.” 
“Seasargus most certainly wouldn’t,” Calena replied. “I’m not sure what you are saying, Rennly.” 
“Just observing,” Rennly said easily. “But I have money of my own. When my...mother died,” he continued. “She left me a sum of money. And the gods pay me handsomely.” 
The idea of taking Rennly’s money, even to keep the glass shop open twisted in Tomrin’s belly. “We wouldn’t want to impose—” 
“How much money are you talking?” Robles said, cutting Tomrin off. 
“Let’s just say more than a few golden ducks.” 
“We are looking for quite a few,” Robles said. 
“And it would be a gamble,” Tomrin said. 
“Then I need to know it will be worth the risk.” 
“Well aren’t you a gambler?” Robles asked. 
“And I like to win more than I lose,” Rennly said. “That’s why I bet on winning horses.” 
“The glass works is a horse that can hardly lose,” Tormrin said. 
“Let me tell you what,” said Rennly. “Calena and I have something we need to do yet tonight. Come with us…  Afterwards I will make you a proposition.” 
Tomrin glanced at a shadowy Robles then back to Rennly. “I don’t—” 
“We’ll go with you,” Robles said. 
Tomrin wasn’t sure how he felt about going anywhere with Rennly or with a Daughter of Heaven’s Glory. “I guess my parents can wait,” he finally said. “Where are we going?” 
“We are going to see Gaz. And it’s a good thing you said yes,” Rennly said, grabbing his nightstick. “Or who knows…”
“We are delighted to join you,” Robles said. 
Tomrin wasn’t sure delighted was the right word. He replaced his staff, doubting Rennly was only joking about using violence to get what he wanted.
Some people never changed.
Chapter 13: A Dark Ritual
	Yet those who lose their sight by eyes, may yet see in riddles.
		—From The Dark Verses

Robles chatted with Rennly and Calena as Tomrin listened on the far side of Robles, away from the them as they all walked together in a line on their small pilgrimage to where Gaz awaited burial. 
An impending dread filled Tomrin’s footsteps however easily Robles chatted.
The evening breeze, the kind that came with the fall of a summer night, harkened an end, as if fall were just around the next street corner. But winter had given away to spring without snow or rain. 
Still a cool air, welcome after a hot day, seeped a chill into Tomrin’s bones. Going to see Gaz meant only one thing with a Daughter of Heaven’s Glory: a chance to say goodbye to Gaz. A rare chance, but not one Tomrin looked forward to. The idea of being around someone willingly spelldancing made his skin crawl, and he sweated despite the cool spring air blowing off the surrounding fields.
When alone, on similar walks, the gloom always pushed in—and so would fear. As a boy Tomrin had run from light to light—when there were any lights. Woolad was tiny, and he could run from one end of it to the other, a thing he’d done often in terror, afraid of imagined bloodbeasts. Now, as he walked down King Street to the charnel house with Robles, Rennly and Calena, a garish light shining down from Serathus, far too bright on the houses growing out of the hill on their left. 
The charnel house and the Woolad temple sat on the right, the tall spire climbing into the sky, towards the starry heavens on Temple Street. Margretta’s warning words played through Tomrin’s mind as he brushed a surreptitious hand across his chest. That’s all it takes! He could almost feel Margretta’s light touch on his hand. He could only imagine what she would say if she knew he was playing at this dangerous game, and for money. Money! Feathered money!
Night Streets [?]
When he could, Tomrin stole glances at Calena in the moonlight. 
She was not unpretty but perhaps a little pump, as was common for her race, Rubish. This close to the border a Rubish and an Orioles was not uncommon, but her relationship with Rennly occupied little of Tomrin’s mind. He was looking for a hint of recognition in her. He couldn’t help but feel that some game was afoot—and wanted to know the rules. Could she see inside him? Could she see the evil mass growing in his heart? 
“No,” he said in answer to one of Calena’s questions. “I don’t miss Woolad.” Robles had tried to weasel out of Rennly’s his proposal, whatever it was, but Rennly was adamant that they had to wait until after they had visited Gaz’s dead body at the charnel house. He led the discussion to the notable and the quaint life and times they had lived in the Woolad of their. 
“Nothing had changed in Woolad since I left,” Tomrin said for himself. “And that’s the problem with it. It’s not that late but already the town is sleeping. Menad would only now be readying itself for dinner.” 
“Well, I grew up in Corundum,” Calena puffed. “It hasn’t changed either. But it never sleeps—and that’s its problem.” 
“I always wanted to go to Corundum,” Robles said. “How was it?” 
Loud and smelly, Tomrin wanted to say, but thought better of it. 
Calena talked about the capital. “The shrine is large, but it’s nothing like on Serathus,” she said. “The Altar Mountain is its own city, its own nation, nothing like it on earth, maybe the Center Lands, but those are spread out. And on the Altar, the Serath are everywhere your turn.” 
“I thought you didn’t want to get into it with a bunch of hicks?” Rennly gently ribbed Calena. 
Tomrin was finding himself liking the young woman. Such a waste.
Magic in the Dark [?]
Calena answered Rennly as the street leveled off and the temple finally loomed up in front of them.
The structure had seemed large once, but now it was just a building that would disappear in the others of Menad. “You said yourself, your friends aren’t the small-town types. They do seem more like men of the world.” 
“That we are,” said Robles. “And here we are; the Woolad Temple; the greatest building in all this vast city.” The steeple cut a dwarfish silhouette in the stars, but Robles actually sounded proud. 
Rennly led them to the back, where the charnel house held the newly departed awaiting burial in the nearby graveyard. The house squatted—only two stories high, enough to let in a Serath, but only barely. The squarish building was connected to the Temple by a small flagstone walkway which they took to the double doors, closed with chains slung between iron handles. The chain was there to keep out wild animals. And bloodbeasts. Or so Tomrin had believed when he was a child. 
Rennly unthreaded the chains. Clig, clig, clig. Pulling open the doors, a yawning darkness peaked out at them. Bad breath, the worst breath Tomrin had ever smelled wafted out. He’d smelled the smell once before—the day after Rennly’s father had died in the fire that consumed the Ocrin carpentry shop. 
“Brings back memories.” Rennly said, swallowing. “Don’t it?” 
Robles answered. “So dark.” His voice was but a whisper. Tomrin felt trapped in a bad dream. 
“I will give us light,” the Daughter of Heaven’s Glory said; her words echoed back out of the dead of the hall. 
Before Tomrin could make sense of her meaning, orange light flared up inside the charnel house.
Shadows lept into existence. Calena’s hands moved with a fluid grace, the light gently quavering with her slow undulating movements. She was spelldancing. 
Tomrin’s belly filled with ice as she glided forward, the ball of orange fire moving forward with her into the vault. 
The Charnel House [?]
Square iron doors lined the walls heading back into the charnel house, storage for the unclaimed dead. In the back, down the aisle, a stone table held a form, draped in red velvet cloth. Gaz! It had to be. His belly had grown overlarge. Tomrin swallowed and strode after a final glance out into the night sky. He wasn’t sure any amount of Rennly’s money was worth this—acting like spelldancing was nothing. You’re crazy!
 Calena stopped five paces from the altar where Gaz’s lifeless body waited. Rennly stopped as well. 
The flaming orb hung in the air over the velvet form on the table. “What are we waiting for?” Tomrin asked. He expected someone to pull back the cover. It was why they were here, wasn’t it? 
“I am about to allow us to commune with your dead friend,” Calena said, “But you need to know not to touch his spirit.” 
“Spirit?” Tomrin said. Communing with the dead sounded like dark magic, like something a Dark Daughter would attempt.
“Why not touch his spirit?” Robles said. 
Calena turned to him as she continued her spelldance. The light glinted off her bright eyes, and she looked like she was bathed in sunlight, her golden hair giving up an inner light. Her placid face spoke of serene contemplation. Her smooth movements made Tomrin think of a swan in flight. “If you touch the spirit at all, his anger, hate, pain and suffering will enter you. It is opposite of the Luster, or so I’m told.”
“The Luster is good?” Tomrin asked. 
“Focus on what she’s saying,” Rennly said. “Unless maybe you think you need to touch Gaz’s shade, go ahead.” 
“We’re focused,” Robles said, and Tomrin added. “And we’re listening.” 
“Even if you don’t touch him, it will be bad, you’ll feel things and smell them.” Calena said, “Unpleasant things.” 
“How unpleasant?” said Robles. 
“You’re not afraid, are you?” Rennly said. “I think Tomrin is turning green already.” 
“I’m not afraid,” Tomrin said, feeling exactly that. This was turning into some strange nightmare where a beautiful creature promised him pain and suffering while Rennly goaded him into something he wasn’t sure he wanted to do. “Let’s just get it over with.” If he had no choice, the sooner it was over, the better. 
“The Luster hurts?” Robles asked.
Calena frowned. “What?”
Tomrin bit his bottom lip to keep from correcting Robles’ misapprehension. “You mean the bond?” Calena said. “You have no idea what pain is until you try to go against the will of the gods?” she asked. 
“That’s why we don’t,” Tomrin said.
“Right,” Robles said, and Tomrin wondered at her words about the bond. It seemed the poor woman was nothing but a slave herself. Just because her masters were the Serath didn’t mean she wasn’t. 
“Good,” she said.
The light winked out.
Through Foul Air [?]
The open doors behind them were gray holes in the darkness, and none of Serathus’ light penetrated the hall this far in. Tomrin questioned the wisdom of what they were doing. He wasn’t sure it was a good idea to disturb the dead, even if they hadn’t yet been buried. “This feels wrong,” he said. 
“She hasn’t even started yet,” Rennly said. His words had a jeering tone, almost laughing from the echoing spread of it. He was enjoying this. 
In the dark, years were stripped away, as if by a foul magic. “Why do we have to do this?” Tomrin said. 
“You’ll see, unless you are too scared?” 
“Just do it already,” Robles said. 
Calena’s voice became harsh and bitter. “Don’t rush me!” 
Maybe it was the darkness but the seconds stretched. The air began to slowly swirl in front of them. It glowed like a mist. Motes of dark swallowed up the light cast by the lighter motes, and the strange mist churned about a center above Gaz’s dead body. 
Tomrin wasn’t sure what he expected as the velvet cover turned from red to gray in the strange and ghastly light. He gasped when a shadowy Gaz emerged from the mist. The stench of corpses and of jellied blood, and death and rot made Tomrin cough. “Chaah!” He wanted to retch and keep on retching. 
Rennly laughed, and Gaz stared blankly forward, seemingly oblivious of the foulness swirling all around him. He was as dead-eyed as Master Laz. A bit of light leaked out what looked like a gash in his forehead. But the specter wasn’t really Gaz, but his shade. 
“I can’t believe I’m seeing this,” Robles said, sounding amazed, not sickened. “This is something I can tell my children; I bet they won’t believe me.” 
Gaz just stood there, and in the strange light four of them, visible, if gray and weird. There were no shadows; it was as if each of them were shades as well. 
“We’re in the spirit world.” Tomrin said. 
“No,” said Calena, “This is just the darklight.” 
Darklight [?]
Tomrin stared at the unblinking shade.
He was too stunned to think and the stench made it difficult for him to focus on anything but drawing in shallow breaths through his mouth. An evil to rival the one growing in him seemed to lodged itself, breath by breath, into his lung. He would never be clean again. Not inside or out.
Gaz always, rather short for an Orish, wasn’t just stocky, but fat. His upswept ears squated on the side of his pale head, and his nose was piggish and small.
It was terrible to see him like this and Tomrin wished he’d never come, but was happy to see that Gaz’s wasn’t as lined and hard as the man’s on the street the previous morning. Still Tormin was afraid this was now how he would remember Gaz, as a fat ugly shade, not as the puggy, slow but good-hearted boy he’d known in his youth. 
“Both of you be quiet,” Rennly said, “I will speak for us.” Satisfied he continued. “How many tins of tarsk did you drink the night you died, Gaz?”
The shade looked at Rennly. Gaz’s mouth moved, but the words did not seem to come from him. The words spoken where in Gaz’s voice, but came from everywhere, from the mist itself, or from inside Tomrin’s head, as if the words were memories. “I’d don’t remember, four or five.” 
“So when you fell down the cliff, you bumped your head and died?” 
A finger went up and touched the gash which bled gray light. “I hit my head.” 
Rennly turned to speak to Calena. “I think I heard enough,” he said. 
“That’s it?” she replied. 
“I don’t need to hear all the Orish details.” 
The ghastly light faded and Tomrin could feel himself breathe again as Calena ended her spelldance. “That wasn’t by the book,” she said. 
“It doesn’t need to be. Gaz was my friend and I knew him to be clumsy, always falling down.” 
Tomrin didn’t remember Gaz always falling down because he was clumsy, but because Rennly pushed him or hit him, and Gaz never stuck up for himself. He tried not to think about the day Rennly was pushing Gaz around, but instead of helping Tomrin had turned and walked away, finding another way home.
The ball of fire which returned and bathed them in golden light.
It was not enough, and Tomrin worried nothing might ever be.
And the Worst of It [?]
Robles turned to Rennly. “I’d like to hear your proposal.” 
“Walk and speak,” Calena said, turning. 
They followed her and the high-flying ball of flame. 
“Of course, my proposal,” said Rennly. “You’ve called me a betting man, and I am, but like I said, I want to know what I’m betting on. I can’t follow all this glass talk.” 
“With us you don’t need to,” Robles said. 
“Or so you say,” Rennly continued. “And I’d trust that, but when Tomrin said the staff was the most civilized weapon and not the baton, I thought...” 
“He was just talking,” Robles said. 
“Maybe, but I think he should show me.” 
“Show you?” 
“Yes, show me.” 
“How would he do that?” Robles said. But Tomrin could think of a few ways. 
“A man with a staff against a man with a baton?” Robles asked. 
“Not a fair fight,” said Tomrin. It was an idea though; he would beat the tar out of Rennly with his baton and him with a staff. 
“I’m thinking. Tomorrow, in the staff competition. Tomrin beats me, I’ll agree to give you the money.”
They exited the vault and the orb of light disappeared.
	Ramifications [?]
By starlight and moonlight Rennly straightened the chain with Robles help. 
“So, what do you say, Tomrin?” Robles said as Rennly tried the doors by jiggling the handles. The sound of the metal bound doors clanging resounded low and muffled echoes seemed to escape from the charnel house. Bonh, bonh. 
“Well, I—” 
“Don’t say, no,” Robles said, putting a hand up. He turned to Rennly. “We will let you know tomorrow.” 
“Fine,” Rennly said. “Think it over. Calena?” 
“I’m not dressed for this cold.” She sounded antsy to leave.
Tomrin wanted to be elsewhere himself. “I need to go to the camp grounds,” he said. He was going to wake his parents up. Robles said goodbye to Rennly and Calena, Tomrin grunting his own. Then, Rennly and Calena took off down the hill. 
Robles and Tomrin walked along Marvin Street parallel to King Street. 
“You need to do the staff competition,” Robles said. 
“Why? So Rennly can beat me up with a stick?” 
“But if you win.” 
“I can’t win,” Tomrin said. “Don’t you see what Rennly’s doing?” 
“Of course I see.” 
“Really. He still blames me for his father. This is his way to get even. He could even kill me.” 
“Or maybe you could beat him and save the glass shop?” 
“I’m not going to do it,” Tomrin said. “I’m not that good at the staff any more. I never really was.” 
“But the money. Think of it.” 
“I am thinking of it.” 
“Not just Rennly’s money. When the glass works—” 
“I know,” Tomrin said. “I know.” 
“Think...what if we knew we’d get the money, even if you lost?” 
“How could that work?” 
“I’m just thinking,” Robles said. “And I think you are right about one thing.” 
“What’s that?” Tomrin wanted to know. He was usually right about nothing anymore it seemed. 
“He does want to beat you with a stick. We can use that to our advantage.” 
They had reached the cross street that led to Robles’ home. Tomrin glanced up the alley and houses standing watch over the top of the small picket fences. The people and houses slept, no lights but the glitter of stars shone from their glass eyes. They were painted varying colors by day, but now stood gray and sleeping. The stone chimneys of the nearest hung quiet. 
Tomrin stopped and turned to Robles. His friends’ words hung in the air. Tomrin wasn’t sure he wanted to know what it was his friend was thinking. Robles stopped as well. 
“Doesn’t it seem odd to you.” Tomrin said. “We just witnessed spell dancing and spoke with the dead, and we are talking about money as if it’s the most important thing in the world?” 
“Not just money,” Robles replied, his teeth glowing as he grinned. “Gold.” 
“I don’t care about gold. But glass.” 
“Glass is more interesting than magic?” 
Tomrin only had to think a moment. “Yes, balls of fire, unfeeling sprites? What are those compared to far sight, and...and?” 
Robles made a noise in his throat. “And Master Laz’s ramifications?”
“Exactly.”
“Maybe Rennly was right about us being men of the world,” Robles offered,
“That’s nonsense.” Tomrin replied. “I’ve seen enough of the world to know that.” 
“Spoken like a true man of it,” Robles said, continuing along Marvin Street. 
Tomrin stepped after him. “Not going home?”
The Journey Home [?]
“Not yet,” Robles said, marching along. “I need to see you safely home.”
Tomrin stepped beside him. “I’ve read tracts on the rudiments of spell dancing,” he said. “There is nothing to it, just channeling anger, fear, and whatnot.” He hadn’t followed it all, but he’d followed it enough to know there was nothing sublime about it despite what the authors of the apocryphal texts had claimed. “The mysteries of the cosmos, of glass, are greater. There is something deeper to it all than even we can see.”
“Sand and heat,” Robles said. “It would be a shame if you threw it all away because you were still afraid of Rennly.” 
“I’m not afraid of Rennly.” 
“Just his staff?” 
“Of it hitting me,” Tomrin said. “Repeatedly.” 
Robles laughed. “Maybe he does need to kill you to get whatever it is out of his system.”
Tomrin shook his head. “He probably just wants to beat the feathers out of me.” 
“Maybe, but things are beginning to look like they have gone beyond just envy,” Robles said. 
“This might be one of those things we talked about?”
“Maybe,” Robles said. “And since Rennly wants this so badly, we can tell him that you’ll do it. But we say, win or lose, he put his money in.” 
“And if he doesn’t go for it?” 
“I can all but guarantee he’ll go for it,” Robles said.
“And if he kills me?” 
“Are you telling me you can’t defend yourself even a little bit?” Robles asked. “I think you’ll do better than you think. Rennly isn’t as disciplined as he thinks he is.” 
They turned down the lane on the side of the fair grounds.
Home [?]
Robles thead the way through the rows of tens. 
“You might as well say, hello.” Tomrin told him as they neared the Ocrin pavilion. He kept his voice low as Robles. The tents on the way sat largely dark. 
“And maybe drink some of that tarsk your father keeps,” said Robles. “It is after sundown.” 
“And then start rumors about Daughters of Heaven?” Tomrin asked. Real tarsk was powerful stuff. 
“There is always talk of False Daughters as well. My aunt hears stories of one coming to town from time to time.” 
“To steal little children,” Tomrin said. “Yet no children here ever go missing. Isn’t that funny?” He tried to keep his voice light and airy but he couldn’t help but wonder if he wasn’t that child Margretta was trying to steal away. He worried what it meant, that he might never be free of her. She knew his secret somehow, and that meant others could. 
They stopped in front of his father’s tent, the orange glow through the canvas walls bringing back memories—some good, others bad. 
Tomrin opened his mouth. “Father,” he said. “It’s me, Tomrin.”
“And Robarthles Kodragus,” his friend added. “And at your service.” 
It was rare to hear Robles use—what he claimed was—his full name. It was said real names had power and knowing someone’s full name gave you power over them. It was nonsense of course but after tonight it seemed almost anything could be true, here in Woolad, in the heart of superstition and fear--here in this kingdom of dark prejudices.
 “We come with blessings from the west,” Tomrin added. “So may the grace of Seasargus be upon you.” It was a ritual greeting for those meeting in the dark of night, and from the southeast, and from steppe lands thereof. Saying the words sent a shiver down Tomrin’s spine. 
Woolad! The place was the land of hypocrisy and lies…his own. 
Chapter 14: A Familiar Game
	For he is the buzzing in your head, the darkling voice within your soul.
		—From The Dark Verses

A shadow moved within the tent and grew, filling it. 
Emy’s tent next door lay dark, but she squealed his name from within the larger one. “Tomrin!” Apparently, she had stayed up too. The large shadow shrunk to the size of a man, not large enough to belong to an Orish man, yet big for a Rubish. The shadow worked the tie strings and the flap flew open. 
Dable Ocrin stood with the lamp to his back, himself still little more than shadows. “Tomrin,” he said, reaching out to shake his hand. “You surprised us.” 
“Sorry to call on you so late, Dable,” Robles said as Dable shook his hand as well. “But I brought your son with me, so I hope all is forgiven.” 
Emy met them both at the flaps. “I was afraid you weren’t going to come,” she said once she’d finished hugging them both. Inside, Janet Ocrin waited. Tomrin’s mother wore a long white robe like Dable and Emy. She politely shook Robles’ hand, and hugged Tomrin. “Your friend, Gaz,” she said. “His mother. You know—” 
Tomrin dropped his pack next.
“Yes, Janet,” Robles said, dropping his pack next to his. “We heard. My aunty sent word right away, but work kept us.” Tomrin admired the remarkable ease with which Robles stretched the truth. Work had kept them, but that was not why they were so late. He himself felt a near stranger in his father’s tent, not wishing to inconvenience. He’d shaken his father’s hand, and hugged his mother and sister awkwardly, and his stance now was one he found he had around strangers. 
“I was just lamenting not having a fourth for a good game of Pincushion.” Dable said. He rubbed his hand together as he eyed the two of them with his green eyes. 
“I don’t know,” Tomrin replied. “It’s late.” 
“I have time for one game,” Robles said. “Single Dip?” 
“Double,” said Dable. “Takes more skill.” 
Robles didn’t argue with him and he, Dable, Tomrin and Emy sat down on cushions around a small lacquered travel table while Janet Ocrin sat on a pillow in the corner, continuing her sewing. Dable removed the pincushion cards from the table’s drawer as Robles sat opposite Tomrin. Emy opposite their father. 
“Want to deal king’s for teams?” Dable said as he shuffled. 
“What I could really go for,” replied Robles, “Is some of that tarsk you are famous for. Built up a thirst walking up here.” 
“This heat is something else,” Dable said as he riffled the cards. “Janet, some tarsk>” 
“None for Emy,” Janet replied standing up. 
Emy frowned. “I’m not too young for tarsk. Not for real tarsk.” 
“She can have a shell,” Dable said. 
“Fine, but only a small shell,” Janet said.
A Touch of Cards [?]
Janet poured them each a shell. 
	Emy’s frown turned to a satisfied grin, which she turned on Robles who winked at her when he spilled a bit of his drink into her anemic cup of the milky fluid.
Tomrin tipped a touch of his in as well and took a sip. The bitterness of real tarsk was quite different from fake tarsk, which most public houses sold from large wooden barrels, not the stone jug Janet had poured the real stuff from. It  numbed his lips and tongue, and didn’t burn. He set his shell down and played his cards. They sadly, unlike the real tarsk, were total garbage.
Robles betted against Dable, as both he and Emy folded early. Pincushion was a game of luck and skill, and guts. Tomrin hated the aspect of luck and he didn’t have the skill or the guts. His father, however, never lacked for guts and won the first bet. They dipped: Dable into Emy’s cards and Robles into Tomrin’s. 
During the play, Emy collected her and Dable’s tricks, and Tomrin took in his and Robles’. The rounds became more serious as they neared the end of the first hand. The playful banter ended, and only quick reminders broke the silence. It’s your play? I know. Who led? I did? Dable wasn’t sweating, but his shell of tarsk sat idle as Robles rolled his own shell in his free  hand. It was Emy’s turn to play a card on Dable’s lead. Robles had sloughed. Now she didn’t know what to do.
“I forgot,” she whined. “I think I miscounted.” 
“No cheating,” Janet Ocrin called from her sewing. Talking about the play was against the rules. 
“I’m not cheating.” Emy said. 
Tomrin quickly counted his and Robles’ stack of cards. It was slightly less than he and Robles needed for an upset. “Dad’s play does look good,” Tomrin said, skirting the rules. It wasn’t a lie. The play was off suit, but the higher cards in it had found their ways into her’s and Dabel’s stack already.
“Think,” Dable commanded Emy. “You know what to do.” 
“No, I don’t, I can’t remember,” she said, soughing. Tomrin was forced to follow suit. 
It was Dable’s trick. Emy scooped it up as Dable dropped the rest of his cards with a holler. “Hah! It didn’t even matter! Tomrin didn’t have the Queen, I did!” 
“And it was already played,” Tomrin said, feeling annoyed. It was the trick he’d messed up, and that had cost them the upset. 
As the Saying Goes [?]
“Sorry,” he said as Dable gloated about making it right on the money. 
“I knew I couldn’t go any higher,” Dable said. “I had that one crow left over. And I snuck it home.” He took a sip of his tarsk. “Ahh!” he said, savoring it. Then setting his shell down, he placed his and Emy’s pins in the cushion to mark their score. “So, how’s Menad? The furnaces still hot?”
“Master Lasoloth is dead,” Tomrin said. 
In the corner Janet made the sign of the tree, silently to herself. 
“Dead?” Dable said. “What does that mean?”
Robles answered as he rifled the deck. Fip, fip, fip. “It means we are looking for money to keep the glassworks afloat.” 
“But without Master Laz?” Dable said. “I thought he was the genius behind the operation?” 
Robles pointed the deck of cards at Tomrin. “We have a new glass master.” 
“Well, I’ll be a feather.” Dable said, swearing. “You really that good?” 
“Dable!” Janet chided. “No swearing. When’s his funeral, Robles?” she asked before her husband could respond. 
“There will be no funeral, I’m afraid,” Robles said. “You can’t imagine—I can’t believe it myself. Big Laz was marked with the Scales of Leviathan...all this time.” 
Janet signed herself again at the mention of the Leviathan’s Mark.
“How?” Dabel asked.
“His house caught on fire,” Robles said.
“Oh, dear sweet Seasargus!” Janet said. 
It didn’t sound like a curse but in Tomrin’s heard it was.
His Life an Open Book [?]
All eyes were on Robles, and Tomrin rubbed his chest, discreetly. It had started itching at the first mention of Master Laz. 
“You would have been proud of us,” Robes said. “Tomrin and I went into the house and rescued him.” 
“But he’s still dead?” Dable said, the cards forgotten. 
Tomrin wished Robles would just hurry up and deal the cards out and forget this conversation. His friend, however, recounted the story, and their heroics from Robles mouth were quite different than Tomrin remembered. Tomrin added but a word or two of his own. 
“And Rennly was there?” Dable asked with interest, not hearing how petty it all sounded to Tomrin now.
“Yes, and he is in town too,” Tomrin said, wishing that he himself wasn’t. Better the conversation returned to him and his mastery of the strange and mysterious substance called glass than to linger on Rennly. “We saw him just tonight.” 
“I always hoped that boy would come to good, unlike his father,” Dable said.
Tomrin had hated Rennly growing up. And now that he was marked and Rennly was a censor, he wanted more than nothing to do with him. Feathered Rennly! 
“Dable, don’t talk ill of the dead,” Janet said. “We’re better than that.” 
“Yes, we are,” Dable agreed, looking at the cards in Robles’ hand. “You going to deal them—or are you afraid?” 
“I think I should be,” Robles said with a grin and began dealing the next hand. “Rennly might be interested in helping finance the glasswork,” he added as he delt himself the final card and looked at it.
“Really?” Dable asked, frowning at his own cards, probably holding junk. 
“Not really,” Tomrin said. His own hand looked decent. “If I beat him at staves tomorrow, he said he’d pitch in.” 
“Really? Now that’s a bout I’d pay money to see,” Dable said. “I taught you both staves, and never did get to see a championship match between you.” 
“I’m not going to do it,” Tomrin said, turning to his sister. “Bet’s to you.” Staves and cards weren’t something he wished to become invested in, but if they were going to play, he wanted to at least see this hand out.
A full suit of hard-faced Adamen stared at him from his hand.
 Money Mints Money [?]
The betting continued around Robles and Dable.
“So broke?” Dable asked.
Tomrin pulled out his billfold. “We’re not broke at all.” He picked the paper bank draws from the billfold and set them down on the table, splaying them out like the card. “At least I’m not broke if the shop is,” he added and reached to pick up the notes.
Dable was faster. “Seventy,” he said as his free hand, he covered the notes.
Tomrin drew back his hand as Dable carefully squeezed the notes into a pile and picked them up. He inspected them one at a time.
“Seventy-five” Tomrin said
Dable set down the banknotes. “Not a small chunk of change,” Dable added. “Master Laz paid well.” 
“Maybe a little too well until the end,” Robles said. 
Tomrin tucked the bills away. “Still less than we could make in Corundum. But it’s not about the pay when you talk about glass. It’s all about the upshot.” The term always struck him as oddly violent.
“That’s right,” Robles said. “And I am still passed.” 
“I’m paseds as well,” Emy added.
It was just Tomrin and Dable in the race, and Dable’s turn.
“I think that is why Rennly wants in. He’s a betting man,” Robles said.
“Gambling.” Janet shook her head. 
Tomrin held her distaste for gambling. “Luckily, the glass shop isn’t a gamble now,” he said. “I’ve managed to make the new telescope work better than ever.” Perhaps he was bragging but his father brought that out in him. It was something Janet liked to call them both on. For now, she let him slide. 
“If you need money, don’t ask your brother Hadras, “Dable said. “He’s had a bad year with this heat.” 
“Where is Hadras?” Robles asked. “I didn’t see his tent. 
Dable passed and Emy answered. “He stayed behind with the flock.” 
“We only brought in the prized ones this year,” Dable said. “And I plan to win.”
Tough Play [?]
“Tomrin versus Rennly would be a good match, wouldn’t it?” Robles said as he played his first card. 
Dable agreed when the play came back around to him. “But gambling is out of the question,” he said, glancing at Janet. The play went forward, and the tricks required their attention as Emy gathered in trick after trick. 
“I think I over-bet my hand,” Tomrin said.
“No table talk,” Janet said from her corner.
“Rennly doesn’t understand glass like us,” Robles injected. “He understands horse flesh.” He glanced at Dable. “Like the way you understand wood and animals. That’s why he wants this bout.” It was a lie, but Tomrin didn’t correct him. He was kicking himself for losing the trick, a he had played two cards out of order. 
Dable cut in with a higher card. “So Rennly knows how to pick them?” 
“He wins at the races all the time,” Robles replied. Tomrin gave up on the hand as Dable cut another trick. He began focusing on what was being said. He couldn’t help but think Robles was going somewhere with his words. The cards, however, were heading for an upset. “I saw his new horse,” Tomrin said. “A grey razor. Looks fast.” 
“Thumper is his name and he is fast,” Robles said. “I’m not saying I’ve been gambling at the races, but I’ve seen him run. The old boy has good temper too.” 
“Good for him,” Dable said as the last trick of the hand was played. “You think Tomrin has a chance against him?” 
“Rennly just wants a good fight is all,” Robles said. “And I’m sure he’ll invest in the glass shop regardless.” 
“Really?” Dable said as Emy counted their. “That’s the upset,” he added. He moved the pins in the pincushion. “You think so?” 
“He goes in—you go in?” Robles said. “Safer money that way. What do you say, Dable?” 
“I’d say I hope Tomrin is a better partner at glass than at pincushion.” 
“I’d say.” 
“Sorry, I totally over-bet my hand, but I haven’t agreed to any of this.” 
“Not even to keep the glass shop going?” Dable asked. “What’s it called Godly Glass Shop?” 
“Works. Godly Glassworks.” Tomrin drank a sip of his tarsk. He hoped he’d start to feel its effects soon. He was annoyed with Robles for forcing the issue when all he wanted was a way out of having to fight Rennly, even if having a censor on board would be good on the surface. “I might not even face him, if I were to enter.”
“How many hours did you train?” Robles said. “You can show up this riff-raff; no question in my mind.” 
“I’m out of practice. Maybe in a glass working competition.” 
“Then there would be no contest,” Robles retorted. 
Dable laughed. “You really that good, Tomrin?” 
“There are masters better than me in the world.” 
Dable drank a self-satisfied sip from his shell. “But not in Menad?” 
“Not in Menad,” Robles said. “Maybe not even in Corundum.” 
They started a new hand and played it out, and another before the game was over. Dable and Emy crushed Tomrin and Robles. 
Their early upset had been the death of their chances. 
“Not All Things Are About Me?” [?]
“I’d love to stay and make it up,” Robles said. “But, one skunk, is enough for me.” 
“The funeral in the morning and Sheep Shearing Days,” Emy said. “I need to go to bed too.” 
“I need to find a bed as well,” Tomrin said standing. “The Country House Inn was full.” 
“You can have my bed,” Emy said. Robles was saying his goodnight to Janet. “I can sleep in here,” Emy added.
“You have a good sister,” Robles said as he shook Tomrin’s hand. 
“She’s not for sale.”
Emy slapped Tomrin’s shoulder. “Tomrin, don’t say stuff like that. You are embarrassing me.” 
“That’s what brothers are for,” Tomrin said. They showed Robles out as Dable began recounting their game to Janet as she worked her sewing needle. 
“Remember what I said,” Robles said as he nudged Tomrin’s backpack with a toe and sniffed the night air. 
“What about?” 
“Having to do the things we don’t want to.” 
“I remember.” 
 Robles bowed towards Emy. “Well, my good lady, against my better judgment I leave you with this lunk. Goodnight.” 
Tomrin and Emy said their own goodnights and Robles tacked into the night.
Tomrin picked up his own pack and Emy led him by the star light to the entrance of her tent. She talked about the books she’d managed to read, and quoted lines at him. He listened only with half an ear as his mind wandered. He pretended to be a good listener—asking questions every so often as he managed a façade of interest. 
“I’m so happy you came, and so sad for you,” she said finally hugging him goodnight. 
“Why sad?” he asked, there was no way she could know what he was thinking. 
“Because your friend Gaz. It’s just so sad, so tragic.” 
“Yes,” Tomrin agreed. “So pointless and tragic.”
A Prelude to the Ode to the End [?]
Emy lit the lamp in her tent while Tomrin waited outside. 
He needed to find a way out of matching staves with Rennly. The Oriloes boy was always stronger, faster, and full of retribution, a troubling combination. I’ve been in Woolad for only a few hours and already things are going south. 
“We missed you so much,” Emy said, then left him for the larger Ocrin tent. 
The lamps had been turned down and Emy disappeared as she entered. 
Tomrin pushed his pack through the flap then ducked inside the smaller of the two Orin tents. Everything neatly arranged, inside it smelled of myrrh from the match she’d used to light the lamp. The match still leaked its smoke and incense into the air, a small gray streamer. The lamp and ashtray sat together on her rainbow colored chest. He recognized the bronze lamp and wooden ashtray. They had both been his when he lived with his family on the steppes. 
Her bed was made prim, as his never was. He saw no point in making his own, but he liked the clean feeling of the sheets when he slid between them after trying the flap and snuffing the lamp. He laid down his eyes open in the dark a moment, then kicked off the top cover and undid the linens. He couldn’t sleep like that. He never could. 
He closed his eyes, exhausted, and drained by the day’s events and those of the previous. He felt both harassed and harried. Robles was nipping at him to fight Rennly, and so was his father in his own way. At the glass shop, Tomrin had worked quite closely with Master Laz and now he wondered what it meant that he felt nothing. 
The glass shop was in trouble; he was in trouble with it. He and it were linked. Now if it failed he didn’t know what he would do.
The idea of having to fight Rennly twisted his guts. There had to be a different way. But what was it? He wrecked his brain wishing he could just tell Robles: No, we’ll find another way. But what? 
If they just had gold, everything else would be easy. With gold they could fly. They could keep the shop in gas. They could ramp up production of the Scarab. New, bigger Scarabs, bigger scopes, and smaller ones for regular use. Glass was the easy part. Money, however, was too easy to spend. There waa a million ways to waste gold, yet so hard to come by. 
Tomrin believed he understood Master Laz just a little better.
The Contamination Leaks Through [?]
Are you contaminating my mind? he asked the mass growing in his chest.
Tomrin wondered if had driven Master Laz to kill himself? Or was just the thought of Purification. As far as Tomrin knew, no man ever returned from Purification and the gods and the censors and the Daughters made it clear: any man who didn’t turn himself in for Purification suffered far worse than the others.
The coiled ball inside even looked evil, but Tomrin felt it more than saw. It pulsed with each heartbeat. Tight coils slipping past another like yarn in skeins, but this yarn was thinner, thes threads so fine he wasn’t sure it wasn’t just a mist, not threads at all. Colorless and dark, the demon’s corruption filled it. He needed to get back to Menad soon before it and the fish-like scale on his chest grew too large. 
He touched the burn under his shirt. After the green light the day before he wasn’t taking any chances, especially not here in Woolad. In Menad Master Laz thought to live out his life like nothing was the matter with him. I have to be smarter than him, he told himself. His run in with Lady Margretta was a wake-up call. More careful. He didn’t know what he would do if she became an even larger problem. He had nowhere to look for help. 
Gold, he thought. It all came down to gold. He hated that money greased the skids, oiled the wheels of fate. He hated that he needed money to make money. Maybe if Rennly had died instead of Gaz. It was a dark thought, but Tomrin was beginning to hate the boy again, and here when he had thought he had finally put all the anger and hate and shame behind him. It was back again, growing.
Why can’t I sleep? An answer floated up to him from the dark embrace of Emy’s tent: Nightmares. 
He feared the otherness buried deep within the machinations of his mind, and he reopened his eyes and stared at the dark gray ceiling of his sister’s tent. 
A crossbeam held the crown of it up. He stared at it. He stared and stared. Ideas and thoughts intruded. One by one he pushed them away and stared some more. He tried not to think about the nightmares which awaited him. Maybe it would be Gaz come back to haunt him, or with his luck the demons from Enfernus. Or visions of Seasargus bent on his Purification. “Feathers,” Tomrin finally swore to himself, becoming frustrated. A man couldn’t live without sleep. I’ll go mad. 
Finally his eyes shut of their own accord.
Chapter 15: A Dirge
	“Thus he spoke, and thus it was written, both on the foundations of the earth and on the bodies of the sky.”
		—From The Book of Light

Tomrin came awake fully as if struck by lightning. For a second he wondered if he was dying. Cold sweat covered his body and the inside of his sister’s tent was dark, but not pitch black. The gray of pre-dawn, the morning twilight outside, blurred his vision as he stared up at the tent’s crossbar. The dying feeling slowly vanished. He couldn’t believe he’d slept. He didn’t remember dreaming, and felt as tired as when he laid down. He closed his eyes. If he had slept, he’d not slept long enough.
“Tomrin!” It was his father’s voice. “Wake up.” Something batted the side of the tent near the flap. Wap. 
Tomrin wanted to yell at his father, to tell him to quit striking the tent, and to go away and leave him alone. “Why?” he demanded instead. His father, Dable Ocrin, had never been one Tomrin could dictate to, nor to his wife, Janet, his mother. Now he was in their tent, and relying on their hospitality and he felt his father was taking advantage of that. 
“You need to get up, we have to hurry.” 
Tomrin sighed, it sounded like a growl, low and disgusted. “The funeral isn’t for hours,” he said. He just wanted to go back to sleep, but Dable rapped the tent wall again. Wap.
“I said get up.” 
“I’m up!” 
The mass in Tomrin’s chest throbbed with irritation. He remembered now why he hated staying with his parents. They never cared what he wanted. His father liked to find him work to do, and his mother always wanted that work to be the gods’ work. 
Tomrin stood up and opened the tent flaps in his small clothes and shirt. “Put some pants on,” Dable said, glancing up and down. His father wore his white robe, and the light of dawn showed his green eyes better than the lamp light. “And your boots.” 
Tomrin suppressed the urge to tell his father to jump in the Lake of Fire. He had sworn at him once before, just before he’d left for the Menad. It left him with a sense of unease for days, for weeks. He often thought of it and hated the idea of such an incident occurring again.
Instead he sat on Emy’s bed and pulled on his pants he’d shucked the night before. With a groan he stomped into his leather boots. “What are we doing up so early?” he asked when he ducked out the tent flap. The sky was growing brighter by the second. The sun rising in the west was hidden by tents, but the orange glow was there. The day would soon be hot. Tomrin suspected his father wanted to have him help him with the animals. “Sheep?”
Dable grabbed a stick from where it leaned with a mate against the side of Emy’s tent, and handed it to Tomrin. “Here you go,” he said. “You remember this staff?” 
Tomrin did. He had made it at the carpenter shop. He’d thought it long lost. “Yes. It’s too heavy and big.” It was made of oak and he had carved some feathers on it, but it remained unfinished, the work far too slow. The staff was useless from the weight, and had all the wrong play and no give.
Dable Ocrin took the other lighter staff in hand. “Follow me.”
“Why?” Tomrin asked, and let his staff’s butt down heavily. “What can we hope to accomplish?” 
“We can knock the dust off.” 
 Mixing It Up [?]
Tomrin followed his father to a corner of the campground where the ground was uneven and scattered with rocks. None of the tents which were now coming alive with people had used the area. Tomrin was almost more afraid his father would hurt himself than anything. “This seems like a bad idea,” he said. “What about your leg?”
“My leg isn’t going to fight Rennly today,” Dable said. “You need to remember the basics.” 
“I haven’t agreed to fight him either,” Tomrin said.
Dable came at him with a slow, lumbering attack. Tomrin would have had no problem defending had his feathered staff not tugged at his hands as if made of lead.
For a minute they sparred.
Dable delivered classic attacks: the Blacksmith’s Hammer, the Swam’s Sickle. Several of the attacks went through but the slap of wood only hurt because flinching wrenched his chest wound.
“It looks like your hinges are totally rusted,” Dable said. He was a large man, and his red face in the dawn glistened from exertion. “Rennly is going to take you apart,” he said as leaned against his smaller staff. 
Tomrin breathed heavily and leaned on his own. “I never even liked mixing staves,” he said. He picked up his staff and headed back towards the tent and wagons. 
The sun’s light pressed down and felt heavy and hot against his back.
Dable caught up with him. “Last night, your mother and I decided we’d help you and the glass shop, but only if Rennly does.”
Tomrin scoffed. “Great.”
“It is called Godly Glassworks, isn’t it? With a censor there, your mother feels there would be nothing wrong with it.”
Tomrin scoffed again but before he could say more, Dable’s was passing out blessings as if he was Seasargus himself.
Greatness Is Earned [?]
Outside the large Ocrin tent, Tomrin asked his father in a low tone. “Why?” 
It was a broad question, but Tomrin thought it was clear enough. Tomrin knew his mother and father. If money was being spent, it was because Dable wanted it such. “You don’t need to be mixed up in this.”
“I want to see you do well,” Dable replied. “And if I make a little more gold because of it, Seasargus won’t mind.”
“Not because Rennly my half-brother?” Rumors had swirled, but Tomrin had always ignored them. His father had always nurtured a competition between them.
“He is,” Dable replied without embarrassment. “But you should not mention that in front of your mother. And, now, you should get dressed.” 
Tomrin glanced down at his clothes—the same as he wore the day before. They were clean enough. “I am dressed,” he said, anger leaking into his voice. “Good enough to dance against Rennly. Like you danced with his mother.”
“Only Seasargus can judge me!” Dable said, heat finally entering his own low voice.
Tomrin gritted his teeth. “Let me have this,” he said. “This is my thing. Keep your money, and if you want to make Rennly your great son, or even Hadras, do it. I’ll even tell my mother to stop lobbying on my behalf--if she does. I don’t even know.” The mass of evil in Tomrin’s chest heaved, pulsed with every angry beat of his heart. “I can make my own fortune--my own way.”
“Your mother doesn’t lobby anyone. She, like Claire Ricot, is a good woman. Now, go change into clean clothes for Gaz’s funeral. You look like a feathered bum, and not my son,” Dable said and stalked off.
As he headed to Emy’s tent Tomrin cursed Rennly, actually wanting to fight him. I can beat him, he told himself as he entered the tent. While he changed into the tan and blue of mourning he fantasized what it would be like to actually win. But who am I kidding? He knew he had lost all finesse with the staff. I apply my mind, not my body. 
He wanted to stay above such base contests of the flesh. Then he could more easily ignore the Luster calling to him even now as it whispered of tainted powers and evil deeds. If he gave in to it he would become nothing but a hollow empty shell, a servant of the demons. Then he would actually need to be purified.
Dressed, he headed back to the large Ocrin tent. The flaps were tied open. He barely had to duck to enter. His mother was serving his Dabel with Emy’s help. They all wore white robes and, on their arms were tied yellow and blue ribbons. His mother eyed him critically. 
“Tomrin, you can’t wear that to the funeral,” she said. 
“The colors are way off,” Emy added.
Tomrin walked over to the squat table. “They are close enough,” he said sitting. “If the ushers don’t let me in, so be it. My world is glass.” He wanted desperately to get back to it, to Menad, and away from here.
“Don’t be arrogant, Tomrin,” said his mother, as she set a tin tray of cut apples and cheese for him. Emy set a cup of water next to it. 
“We have an extra robe for you,” Emy said. “And stripes.” 
“After food,” Dable said. He said a prayer once Janet and Emy sat down to eat. 
The apple tasted old but bursting with flavor, if spongy. The cheese was white and made from goat milk. Both tasted strong and savory, yet not decadent like the breakfasts Mistress Carls served in Menad. 
When they finished his mother found him a robe, one from her own chest. “Put this one,” she said, “I’ll find the extra stripes.” 
Tomrin sighed, but took the robe over his arm. There was no point in resisting. He wasn’t arrogant, he just didn’t care about conforming to all the small superstitious ideas that pervaded the small minds of Woolad and its surrounding environs.
Holding the robe up, Tomrin stepped outside. 
What Comes of Day [?]
Dable headed with him, but went to check on the animals in the pens.
When Tomrin re-entered Emy’s tent, he laid down the white cashmere robe and tied the tent flaps closed. Just what I need, someone sticking in their head with my shirt off. 
He undressed and pulled the robe over his head. After struggling a minute he finally found the hand and arm holes. Tugging the robe down, he tied its rope belt, looping it over and adjusting it the best he could. Untying the tent flaps, he headed outside feeling phony. White was for anointment and atonement.
The pulsing mass of evil gray inside his chest mocked him. You just needed a shepherd’s crook to complete your disguise. Great son? More like false son. Tomrin wondered if maybe Dable wasn’t really his father. It was silly, because of course the old man was. His own green eyes were his, if not his temperament. 
Back in the main tent, Tomrin let his mother and Emy tie the streamers on his upper arms to match their own. “Now, we all look like a family,” Emy said. 
He and Emy sat on the cushions in front of the lacquered table and started up a game of two-handed pincushion while they waited for Dable to return. Emy talked and Tomrin distractedly listened. She had met a boy on the steppes, but it turned out he wasn’t the one. They played two hands, before their mother admonished Emy that she was talking way too much. “Talking poor Tomrin’s ear off.” 
“I don’t mind,” he said. It let him think, to ruminate on his own thoughts. He was trying to think back to the moment when everything seemed to spin out of his control. “The green glow,” he said. 
“What?” Emy asked him, pausing her own chatter a moment. 
“Oh, nothing,” Tomrin replied.
She continued on about her dream from the night before.
To Temple [?]
Dable returned and they headed for the temple. 
Near the temple, the stream of yellow and blue clad mourners pooled up until the flow through the door all but stalled. Orish families, tall, wide and rough looking—even in their mourning garb—loomed over little old Rubish women, their faces ashen with age. A small number of Ruddy skinned Peregrine men and women and several Orioles were amongst the mourners.
A group of censors parted the crowd, Rennly at their head. They didn’t have to say a word. Out of fear or respect people parted before the black clad men in silk suits, batons wagging at their hips. The censors were Orioles to a man and they looked like they had come from Menad and Zircos before that. By some cruel luck they lived when Big Laz and Gaz were dead. 
The injustice of it burnt in Tomrin’s heart as one of the men laughed as they neared the door. Emy spoke quietly in Tomrin’s ear, but he lost the thread of her meaning as his anger simmered, not too hot, but not yet cold. Nothing to be done, Tomrin told himself. Maybe if time was an illusion as the Luster claimed, but Master’s Laz and Gaz were dead, and tragically that could not be undone. Laz, if not Gaz, was a visionary. These men, though, with their bludgeons, what were they? Small minds. If one of them were to die, what loss to the world? Someone would mourn them probably, but just as likely someone would laugh at their funeral too.
Master Laz wasn’t the Lightshy Crow. He was a man, not a carrion eater. You should be the Lightshy Crow. Just the Luster talking and Tomrin pushed the thought down even as his heart quickened. Am I a fool for not taking Lady Margretta’s offer? The raw power of the tainted gift would make him great and terrible. He would not fear Rennly. He would fear nothing. You could live as a god.
Emy touched his arm. “Sad for Gaz?” she said. “We all are.”
Tomrin wiped the angry tears from his eyes. “Yes,” he said, “And for Master Laz. I could have done more.”
“You did everything you could.” 
Tomrin sniffed, swallowing saltiness. “I know.” He didn’t like lying to his sister. He had no qualms lying to his father or mother, but it was different with Emy. “I could have done more before the explosion.” 
“You can’t beat yourself up over it.” 
“I know,” he said. “That’s Rennly’s job it seems.” 
Emy suppressed a laugh, making a squeaking noise. “You’re going to enter the competition?”
“No,” Tomrin said. “I don’t know...a woman, a lady, she said she could help us.” 
“With money for the shop?” 
“I mean Lazoloth, and the shop when he was still alive.” 
Emy made a face, as if thinking. “He was wrong for not turning himself over for Purification.
“But he didn’t have to die,” Tomrin said. “Life is so fragile,”
“I’m just happy you’re safe with us.” 
Tomrin forced out a smile. “I just hope the new glass shop finally succeeds.” 
“I have faith in you.”
Tomrin wished he shared her faith in that, if nothing else.
The Pilgrimage [?]
They reached the doors and ushers showed Tomrin them to their seats.
Men and women began to pack the Temple full. When Tomrin stole a glance around he realized he recognized many of the people despite it having been years since he’d been inside the Woolad temple. He did, however, remember it being this stuffy.
On the altar, Gaz’s long rectangular coffin lay covered in a red velvet pall. Members of his family and their owners, an older Rubish couple, Master and Mistress Clivent sat in the first row. They looked very much like the farmers that they were, their yellow and blue as drab as burlap itself. 
Behind them were Rennly and the censors. They were less impressive than their counterparts in the cut glass with its gods, Daughters, and glass-censors, yet the gray stone walls radiated a drabness to fill the place—like a pig in a dress. In with the fleshy pig-nosed Dutters and red-headed Clittons from a grandfather who had hailed from the north Adamant, and for families and faces
Tomrin realized he recognized as many he didn’t. The people Tomrin didn’t recognise seemed out of place, their blues and yellows as strained as his tan pants and blue gray shirt. Outsiders, he thought, but remembered he wore the pilgrim white,and he was no resident himself. Sheep Shearing Days.
“Lookers-on,” he said to Emy in a whisper. 
“What?” she asked back, but Tomrin couldn’t respond. Janet hushed him, and on Tomrin’s right Dable gave them both a look. No one should have been talking, yet the temple buzzed with the dull sound of boredom. The doors closed. Minutes passed but no cantor arrived at the front. 
A cough form the balcony turned Tomrin’s head. The choir too was dressed in white, streamers on their arms. In them was Robles. The boy grinned down and flipped his streamers at Tomrin and mouthed something. Tomrin couldn’t understand what he was saying and after shaking his head, he gave up and looked away. 
Tomrin had missed Bethany on his first perusal, but she sat on on his left, beyond his family and hers. He hardly recognized her. She was looking more beautiful than he remembered, her hair long and in a black braid, like Emy’s and Janet’s.
Hers, however, was burnished to an onyx glow.
Up in Smoke [?]
Tomrin glanced away when the cantor entered with two altar boys in white. 
They wore no yellow or blue morning band, but cords of red dyed silk about their waists. The cantor wore yellow and blue vestments. In his right hand he held a gilded shepherd’s crook. Had it been solid gold the thing would weigh a ton and a half. 
Both boys held censers wafting smoke and the smell of incense with each swing at their sides. Tomrin had their job once but he did not know the cantor. Though old, the man moved with a solid grace. Slowly, the mummer of errant whispers ceased. 
The man began to cant, and his voice, low and impressive in its depth, rebounded through the high-ceiled temple. Tomrin drifted in his thoughts, sluggishly keeping his eyes open as sleep tugged at his mind. Nothing the cantor said hadn’t been said before and with more passion, with more emotion. The man began to drone. The service crawled to its inevitable conclusion, the only decent parts were when the choir sang, Robles’ clear voice carrying them.
Then the casket with Gaz’s body was carried out a side door to the burial yard by his surviving relatives. The front of the temple emptied pew by pew as the congregants joined the cantor and the altar boys and Gaz’s family outside on the brown grass. Those who came stood and clustered around an open grave as the casket was lowered into the dry earth. 
Bethany stood so close to Tomrin that her scent cut through the smell of dried earth. Bethany Karlite. She was like a dark presence pushing against his mind.
Rennly and the other censors stood on the other side of Gaz’s grave. Rennly’s bright green eyes flashed with the dark hint of a smile when they lit Bethany. 
She shrugged at him, like he was nothing to her.
A Last Goodbye [?]
Robles and the choir sang as shovel loads of dirt dropped from the dry pile onto the coffin. 
The spade passed from person to person. First Gaz’s mother then step-father and his two-half brothers, both taller and thinner than Gaz, their hair thinning on top exposing their short, upswept ears. Finally, Gaz’s youngest sister tossed on a bit of dirt and handed the shovel to Rennly. Her eyes were red but she moved unblinking as if in a daze and hurried after the others of her clan.
Rennly attacked the dirty pile with the shovel. Chlank. 
Pebbles of rock and dirt clattered the wooden coffin. 
For a second Tomrin and Rennly’s eyes locked. A demonic hatred leaked out of Rennly’s greedy eyes, and Tomrin glanced away. Feathers. Rennly was not going to let things be. Not now, not ever. Insanity had taken his step-brother. Tomrin wondered if Rennly knew they were brothers.
When it came to Tomrin’s turn to shovel dirt on Gaz’s casket, he used both hands but not his feet to sink the spade into the dirt. The undertaker would see the grave filled fully, this was only symbolic work. Goodbye old friend. Levering the shovel, Tomrin dropped his dirt and handed the shovel to Emy then headed inside out of the late morning sun.
Even in white he was beginning to fry.
Then the service was over with a dirge.
Reverberations [?]
Men and women exited with voices raised louder than the earlier clamor. 
The funeral was over. Seasargus be praised. The thought was not entirely ironic. It was just one thing out of the hundreds the cantor had said. Gaz was still dead, still insensate. There was nothing in the old man’s words but empty platitudes and false hope. Sadness finally choked Tomrin as he and Emy and Dable and Janet headed out the same doors they had first entered.
He forced himself to breathe even as Emy cried in the landing area outside the temple. Everyone talked freely now. Dable spoke with Gaz’s family; trite words and Tomrin was happy to be away from their pain.
When Robles joined Tomrin, he and Dable were headed back to Emy and Janet. Dable was talking about the cantor. “The man sermonized worse than ever. I don’t know where they get these men. Their views are so outside, so unorthodox.”
Tomrin wasn’t sure what his problem was with the cantor’s views. Once he might have cared what his father was saying, but Tomrin’s own views had turned from the unorthodox to downright dangerous. “The music was good,” he said, turning to Robles, “You raised a pleasing sound to the heavens.” 
Robles licked his lips like a hot dog. “I can howl with the best of them.” He wore his white choir robe. It was linen, not breathing cashmir, and looked hot. 
“You had some competition on the ground,” Dable said. 
“I did?” 
“He means Rennly,” Tomrin said. 
“He is a decent singer.” 
“He seemed to be good at what he does,” Dable said. “Maybe Tomrin is wise to avoid him in the ring.” 
“Well it’s too late for that,” Tomrin said. “I’ve already decided to enter the competition.”
Dable clapped him on his back. “That’s my boy!” 
“What tipped the scales?” Robles asked. 
“Rennly. He’s determined to do something. I may not be good at the staff anymore—but I once was. I hope that can carry me. And you are right—this is something I have to do that I don’t want to. If I lose, we can always find other money. Or other work if it comes to that. We have the skills.”
“Time to toss the die?” Dable said. 
“Yes,” Tomrin said, pointing his index finger. “I hate gambling, but Rennly is forcing me to it, and not just him, but you two it seems as well.” 
“At least you know staves,” Robles said. “And sometimes when a dog bites you, your only hope is to bite back.”
“You have hope,” Dabel said, lowering his eyebrows at that. It was his tell that he too believed what Robles said but would not admit for fear of Janet, whom he kept happy above all others in outings like this. 
She too frowned.
Chapter 16: Sheep Shearing Days
	Such is the crow and such is the light, and such is the feeling he gets every night!
		—A Rubish nursery rhyme

Tomrin licked sugar and powdered cinnamon from his fingers.
Bachnam’s Bakery ran the pastry tent, and he and Robles had cut a bee line for it. Men and women ate at benches under the tents. Nearby other foods and drink were purveyed at booths and buildings. Many of the people in them still wore their yellow and blue.
A light breeze did little to cool Tomrin. Even under the tents the heat forced sweat from his pores as he ate his fried and sugared scone. Too hot, he thought. Too hot for hot food. “It’s too hot for anything.”
“Not for the first scone of the Sheep Shearing Days,” Robles said, washing his finger with a bit of water from his tin. “Good, but sticky.” His friend hated anything on his fingers and hands. When he wore gloves, he cut fingers out, like a beggar or orphaned pickpocket. 
“Mine was nutty and good,” Tomrin said and washed the pastry and the sweetened spices from his mouth and tongue with a sip of water from his own tin. It was cool from the ice—which had already melted. The iced water had cost them nearly as much as the scones, several coopers each. He set down the tin. “Rennly,” he said, nodding. 
His half-brother and two censors from the funeral approached down the white quartz path between the booths. 
Robles wiggles his fingers to dry them. “If you’re worried, maybe we should practice.” 
“I mean, here he comes,” Tomrin said. “I’ve already practiced.” The workout with his father hadn’t helped, but he didn’t mention that. 
“Time to work our magic,” Robles said, ending his finger dance. 
“Your magic,” Tomrin said. “I leave this to you. It is your idea.” 
“Tomrin Ocrin and Robles Kodragus; Woolad’s prodigal sons,” Rennly said to his two fellow censors. 
Without leaving the bench, Robles bowed, still sitting at the table. “And at your service.”
“Robles, why don’t you show these two around,” Rennly said without bothering to introduce the two censors with him. “Tomrin and I have business to discuss.” 
“But I am his business partner.” 
“And don’t you trust him?” Rennly asked, sweeping his hands in dismissal. “I’m sure he’ll tell you all about our little conversation.” 
“Robles stays,” Tomrin injected. 
Rennly’s bright green eyes gleamed. “Then I guess we have nothing to discuss,” he said, adjusting his shirt, his golden feather badge glinting in the sun.
Robles stood. “Of course I trust him, and I’d be delighted to show your friends around. Maybe a quick game of darts.” Robles led the two censors off down the path, offering to make their game more interesting. “A small wager on the outcome?”
Rules of the Game [?]
A Orish man, counselor Marten, pushed past Robles and the censors. What’s he doing here? Tomrin wondered. If he was here, then the woman with the ruby hair and dark skin had to be close. The idea of a False Daughter here threatened to unnerve him, but the man headed straight for the Bakery’s ordering window. 
Rennly sat down.
“Where was Calena this morning for Gaz’s funeral?” Tomrin asked, thinking to toss Rennly off with his own line of question. “I didn’t see her.” 
“She decided to head home to Menad,” Rennly said. “The food at the Country House Inn disagreed with her this morning.” Rennly picked up Robles’ tin and took a drink. “One of the sauces.” 
“You sick?” 
“If only you were that lucky,” Rennly said. “But no, I didn’t have any.” Rennly’s eyes flashed a cruel green, and for a second they glowed with his insanity.
“I don’t rely on luck,” Tomrin said. “I only bet on sure things.” 
“So, you don’t want the gold?” Rennly said. 
“I didn’t say that,” Tomrin said quickly, wishing Robles had stayed. The Rennly fish was rapidly slipping off the line. “You want this bout—you clearly want to prove something.” 
“I have nothing to prove,” Rennly replied. The large Orish man, Marten, took a scone loaded with jelly from the delivery window and seemingly intent on it sat silently down behind Rennly.
Tomrin pursed his lips. “What is it then, vengeance?” he asked. “Or is it envy?” 
Rennly scoffed, “I don’t even know what you are talking about.” 
“Something is driving you, Rennly? What is it? Whatever it is, it is not going to turn out well. You need to give it up...for your own good.” 
“My own good?” Rennly asked. “Since when have you thought about anyone but yourself?” Rennly’s tone turned menacing, and a seething anger slithering through his teeth like a snake. “You aren’t even sad Gaz is dead.”
“Ah, we shouldn’t do this, Rennly,” Tomrin said and swept his hand towards the path and the way towards the staves. “It’s dangerous, and not just for us, but for others too.”
Rennly didn’t seem to hear. He smacked his teeth and licked his lips. “Say we do this, what’s to keep you from just running off and sticking me with the deal? That’s my concern.”
Riddle [?]
“That you ask proves you don’t know anything about me,” Tomrin said, stalling. Rennly was correct about him being a coward, but Tomrin was not about to let him know that. “I talked to my father this morning.” 
“About what?” Rennly asked and Tomrin was a little surprised how easy it was to distract his step-brother. Maybe he knows?
“We talked about things. He’s watched your progression with interest. Just as he watches mine. And how this—” Tomrin swirled his hand through the air as he amended the conversation. “—All this is not healthy for you. You need to let it go. I can see it inside you. My father thinks you are a good person, but—” Tomrin folded his arms, and tried not to wince too badly as he made his face stern. “—I’m afraid this thing between us is going to lead you to a bad end.” 
“Your concern is most comforting,” Rennly sneered. “So is this tough guy attitude you seem to have adopted now. I have a story you should hear?” 
“Feathers,” Tomrin swore, but didn’t have time to properly answer before Rennly continued, and while Marten’s ears didn’t exactly perk up, the Orish man raised an eyebrow.
“After my father died and my mother and I moved up into the Emerald Forest, she took me to see an old woman. You know the kind?” 
“Do I?” Tomrin asked. He wasn’t sure where Rennly was going with all this but he was afraid where it might be. 
“She was strange, strange beyond weird. Her hut was a wreck of bones and twigs, and she looked like she was on the verge of death. Her bones poked from her papery-yellow skin. She claimed she could see the future in the lines on my hand.” Rennly rubbed a thumb across his palm. “She told me I have one thing and only one thing to fear.” Rennly balled his fists on the table. “Now you see why I have no fear of you or this match?” 
“Really? What did she say?” Tomrin asked. “Without knowing, your story makes no sense. Why tell it?” 
Rennly snorted a laugh, “Ha. She said I only had to fear the Lightshy Crow, you Peregrine’s boogeyman.”
“Makes sense. It’s the only thing I fear—myself,” Tomrin added puzzled at his own slip of the tongue, and for a moment a shadow, like that cast by the Corvine Man himself seemed to hover over him. Marten frowned into the table and into the half-chewed scone in his massive Orish hands. 
“I don’t believe in tales slaves tell,” Rennly said, coming out of reverie. “You’re afraid to fight me. I can see that. You’re afraid I might slip and hurt you? The fear is in your eyes. Who is the coward now?”
Smarts [?]
An unpleasant thrill shot through Tomrin at the words coming out his mouth echoing his own.
“Not I and despite my misgivings,” he said. “I am submitting to you a wager about the outcome.”
“What? Submit to me a wager?” Rennly asked. “What are you even saying?”
“What am I saying?” Tomrin said. “I’m enter the staves competition. But—” He held up a finger. “—Win or lose you buy in.”
“That’s quite the wager. Win or lose!” Rennly spat. “And what guarantee you’ll even try? 
“Barring a dark horse—you know we’ll see each other in the ring.” 
“That’s not good enough.” Rennly’s eyes were as hard as flint glass. “How about this and because I want to fight you...to see what you’re made of, I—” 
“Not to beat the tar out of me because of...what happened?” Tomrin asked. “Or because…? Nevermind. Fine. If for some reason we don’t meet in the champion’s ring. We will have our own bout—just you and me.” 
Rennly made a thoughtful sound in his throat. “No,” he said. “We’ll have our remedial bouts—regardless if we meet.” 
“What do you mean?” 
“I mean, if you don’t win, we will have another bout, and another until you do.” 
Tomrin made a noise. His idea had been good, but Rennly had just twisted it. “That won’t work.”
“Sure, it will. After work—if I will find you or send you word to come to the temple—you could use more prayer in your life anyway.” 
“Only until I beat you?” Tomrin said, stalling and afraid to offer anything more for fear Rennly would twist that too. 
“That’s right.” 
“Fine,” Tomrin said, “And you will cover operations, payable every month. Automatic transfers until the glassworks ends its draws?” 
“Equity for every draw,” Rennly said pointing at the table. 
“Naturally. But no control.” 
Rennly pointed to his badge. “You forget I have powers no matter what. The power of censure.” 
“Only that.” 
“I think every night might be too often,” Rennly mused. “Maybe the first week or so. To whip you into shape. To help you remember your Peregrine blood.”
“Rennly,” Tomrin tsked. “Such petty barbs. Look around you. Your friends aren’t even here to snicker.”
A Contract [?]
Marten stood and walked over as Robles and the censors returned.
The place was filling up as more from the funeral came for food and drink.
“I...you—” Marten said, gesturing at Tomrin. “I saw you in Menad. I couldn’t help but overhear your conversation.” 
“Best you forget it then,” Rennly said, irritated at the interruption at the point of his strongest insult. 
“I will do that,” Marten replied as Robles and the other censors walked into the tents’ shade. “And I can also offer my services...as an advocate. I do contracts on the side.” The man was wearing his vest from the other day. Other than his ancestry, he looked dressed every bit a lawyer. 
Tomrin wanted to ask the man if he was following him. And where is the dark lady? Tomrin glanced at Robles and stood up. “We worked out the details.” 
“Well, not exactly,” Marten said. “If you want, I can help fill them in. I can write and file the contract so it’s official.” 
“What are the details? A deal is struck?” Robles asked.
“Yes, and if—” Rennly raised a hand to point at Marten. 
“Counsellor Marten, no esquire—” 
“Obviously,” Rennly said. The man was Orish and was technically a slave. He could hold no title, not in Corundum nor anywhere. 
“Obviously,” Marten said easily and continued. He outlined the deal, adding dates and party-this and party-that and herefores seemingly at random, but what he said was largely what Rennly agreed to. “And I can write it up for you to sign for a small fee.” 
Robles and Marten huggled over the fee. “And I want it before the competition is over,” Robles added. 
“Done,” Marten replied. “Now if you excuse me, I have a spot of work to do.” He left the pavilion at a dignified pace. 
Rennly wore a wry smile. “You worked him down for my benefit?” 
“You need to know that your money will not be wasted here, at Godly Glasswork.” Robles said with a bow. “But if you will excuse us as well, it seems Tomrin and I have a bit of a bout to prepare for.”
“Yes,” Rennly said with a mocking bow of his own. “And let’s make it a good one.”
Regrets [?]
“I can’t help feeling we’ve gotten into bed with an asp,” Tomrin said as he and Robles headed for the staves booth.
The booths and games were in full swing. The knives and trinkets for sale at one booth caught Tomrin’s eye. It was all junk though; all flash and gilt with no craftsmanship. At the staves pavilion two young boys sparred as judges called out points for foot work as well as blocks and strikes. In the adults’ division only strikes would count. 
Robles signed Tomrin up at the table and paid the woman behind the counter the entry fee, “And, can we borrow a couple of staves to practice with?” he asked, shining her his brightest smile. “Mistress Gorkel.” 
“Against the rules,” she replied. Tight curled hair ringed her stony face. 
“But—” 
“No, Master Robles,” she snapped. “The rules are the rules.” 
“I have staves back at the tent,” Tomrin said. 
“Good, I’d hate to break any rules, or anything,” Robles said darkly. Mistress Gorkel sniffed. 
“She ate a sour apple,” Tomrin offered as they headed out of the pavilion leaving the clack, clack of artlessly wielded staves and generous calling of points—yellow, blue—behind. The score keeper, a member of the Gorkel family, marked each call. Another called the tens.
Down a side path lined with small booths, the games were nonsense games for children. Many of the booths were empty as if the drought had dried them up too. Past the wooden pens with the cows, sheep, goats and other farm animals, he and Robles entered the small sea of tents, wagons, and carts. The visitors who came for Sheep Shearing Days traveled heavy, and heavily. 
Robles said hello to everyone they met. Tomrin just nodded and gave his fellow travelers a pinched smile. Half-deserted, the dirt paths still felt choked with strangers to Tomrin.
One Last Practice [?]
The two staves Dabel had fished up earlier were where he had left them leaned against the large Ocrin tent. “Hello, Janet,” Robles said, ducking his head inside the tent. 
“Hello, Robles. Tomrin is at the fair,” she replied.  
“I have him here with me. He’s going to enter the staff competition. He needs to brush up.” 
“Hello mother,” Tomrin said through the wall and without ducking in. 
“I’m sure your father will be happy to hear it,” Janet said, sounding disgruntled with one or both of them.
Robles pulled his head from the tent flaps, and he and Tomrin headed for the rocky, uneven ground when Tomrin offered it as a practice place. 
“This is great,” Robles said. He held the staff Dable used and Tomrin held his colossal oak one across his chest. “You can work on your footwork.” 
He sounded facetious to Tomrin.
“That or break an ankle,” Tomrin said, and jabbed with his massive staff. It felt like thrusting a log. Robles countered easily, clut, and spun. It was a nonsense move, but it hid his staff from Tomrin and instead of attacking freely he was forced to go on the defensive. Robles’s swing started low—and stayed low. The faint worked. Tuck. What seemed like a quick swing was a trap.
“Point for me,” Robles said as Tomrin rubbed his ankle. “So what did you and Rennly talk about?”
“Nothing. You know he’s my brother, right?”
“Yes, of course,” Robles said. “The poor guy.”
They traded a couple of countered swipes. Clut, clut. 
“It’s like you should be the one to fight him,” Tomrin said as sweet began beading on the back of his hands. He rubbed his sweaty forehead. “I’m going to need a sweatband.” They continued to spar in silence, their sticks clacking; Robles made moves and Tomrin countered. “I feel it coming back to me.” 
“It’s just like riding a horse,” Robles said. 
Tomrin swung at Robles’ hands. “You know what I think about horses.” 
Robles snorted and soon Dable walked over. 
Calls [?]
Robles called a halt. “Whoa!” He leaned on his staff. “What do you think, Dable?” 
“I think you better get your grand champion to the ring. The competition is about to start.” 
Tomrin glanced at the sun. It had moved. Instead of being a hot glare above it was a red glare in the west. “We lost track of time,” he said, handing his staff to his father. “I need water.” 
Dable led him and Robles back to the tent. “You also need something to keep the sweat from your eye’s,” Dable said as Janet poured water for them. “You can’t be swatting sweat and expecting to win.” 
“I know that,” Tomrin said, wondering about his chance of actually winning, of actually beating Rennly. “I just need a handkerchief.” 
“A streamer?” Janet offered, holding up a yellow streamer. 
“No,” Dable said, “Can’t be yellow or blue.” 
“What can’t be yellow or blue?” Emy asked, darkening the tent’s opening. She ducked in. A young Orish girl as big as an ox followed her inside. 
“My head band,” Tomrin said. “I need a handkerchief.” 
“Oh, I have one,” Emy said and headed outside, leaving the large girl standing at the flaps with a “stay here.” The girl glanced awkwardly behind her. Tomrin’s cringed for her. 
Robles spoke. “Doing well, Kam?” He reached out a hand to the girl, and walked over to her. “I heard you singing.” 
Kam took Robles’ hand and shook. “Thank you master Robles. I heard you too.” 
“Everyone heard Robles,” Dable said with a wry grin for Tomrin. 
Tomrin grinned and nodded but hid his smile and drank the last of his water. 
Emy returned with a head scarf. It was white cashmere embroidered with a black swan in flight, its neck bent as if it were looking for a place to land up on some unseen body of water. “I made it myself,” she said, as she handed it to Tomrin. He began folding it up.
Robles snatched it from him. “Fold it right,” he said, snapping the cloth. He folded it so the swan’s head and neck sat centered. “Turn around.” Tomrin complied, and Robles tied the handkerchief around his head. 
“We better hurry,” Dable said, and Emy peppered them all with a million questions as she, Kam, Dable and Robles trudged with Tomrin to the fairgrounds. 
What Matters Now [?]
The final bout of the youth’s competition was just starting as they rounded on the Gorkel tent. 
A crowd had gathered to watch, or to await their own time in the ring. The flinty clerk was calling for entrants to hurry and sign up before this last match was decided. Rennly and his censors were among the crowd watching the bout. The parents of two boys in the ring were cheering for their respective sons. Robles knew them and their parents’ names and mentioned them to Tomrin but he promptly forgot. Who they were didn’t matter, only the boy’s techniques mattered now, not their names.
Both were Rubish, but the boy with the yellow streamer was half a hand taller than the boy with the blue tied around his arm. The taller was faster and had the reach but evident in his gangly moves he lacked a solid technique. Tomrin found himself rooting for the shorter, stockier boy. He was slow and weighted down with fat, but his technique was solid, a true student of the art. In this ribbon-gaining round, only strikes counted; they were adults now. 
As their bout progressed the taller boy grew visually frustrated and angry. 
The chubby boy with the yellow streamer countered his attacks with a practiced grace. But Tomrin could see him wearing down. He was not the only one to see it. The tall boy’s father called out to his son. “Wear him down, Brad! Wear him down! He’s flagging!” 
After that Brad moved with greater speed, less skill, like a viper making wild swings. Clatch, clatch, clatch. Clack, clack, clack. Then his staff stuck the blue boy. Thak. The judge called out. “Yellow point!” The blows kept landing.
the blue boy’s parents cheered him on. “Go, Mathis,” but there was too much heat and his face had gone from pink to red, and sweat mopped down his hair. With the slap of Brad’s staff against his middle the match was called. The ten-point margin had been breached, eighteen to twenty-eight. 
Brad’s parents cheered, and others clapped. The loser exited the ring, and had to be called back. His ribbon was red for second place, and Brad’s was blue for first. “But don’t leave,” the referee said, “We still have to reward the best-in-show after the adults are done. Anyone could win it! Even second place,” the judge said, gaining laughs from the crowd.
With the boys finally sent from the ring, and the rules were explained again. Tomrin had heard them before. 
He once stood in the champion’s ring as a boy, before he’d given up the sport, if it could be called such a thing; boys and grown men beating each other up with sticks. It smacked of barbarism. 
It was after his father had become so worked up over a poor call by the referee that Tomrin had finally given it all up. He’d swatted others with sticks because his father had pushed him to it, and that was the only reason. When Dable had cried angry tears of rage, finally Tomrin grew the nerve to tell him he was through with it. It was only a game. 
Staves, as weapons went, were more civilized than daggers or swords, but they were still weapons.
No Backing Out Now [?]
“I don’t see our Orish counselor,” Tomrin said. 
Robles ignored him. “We should make sure Rennly’s still in.” He headed through the ring to where Rennly was. Tomrin headed after a moment’s hesitation as he thought about the possibility of a dark horse. More time to train, he thought. He wanted to beat Rennly badly for pushing him into this. 
“Don’t tell me you are backing out,” Rennly said. 
“Not at all,” Robles replied. “We wanted to make sure you weren’t.” 
“As if I am the one afraid?” Rennly said with a satisfied grin. His green eyes seemed to let him see inside, and Tomrin felt under a looking glass. 
“I’m not afraid,” Tomrin said, feeling a surge in his heart. He turned to Robles. “I’m hungry.” 
“Yes, food!” 
They headed back through the crowd. Several bouts stood ahead of Tomrin’s first, and two before Rennly’s. “We need to get back to see his bout,” Tomrin said. 
“And I need to make my other tosses in the knife throw too. Rennly entered it as well.” 
“At least one of us will beat him.” 
“Only yours matters to the glass shop.”
A Quick Bite [?]
There was a nervous energy at the Farmers Stock Feed tent. 
The supply stone was hosting for the price of one silver per plate. When Tomrin sat down with his lamb chops, he found himself almost missing Rennly’s company. For all his faults, he was better than the superstitious Orish  man to his left. While Tomrin wished for Robles help, he had his own trouble in the shape of a Rubish matron waiting to discuss the demon’s role in this drought and how it had impacted the price of their meager meal. 
The Orish peasant next to Tomrin spoke of strange going’s-ons. “Just last night—” The man eyed Tomrin with his dull orbs, and lowered his voice. “—a False Daughters came by the graveyard out yonder butte and brought all the dead back, straight to life to roam and haunt. Gives me chills to think of it. I tell you that. It’s what this world is coming to.” 
Tomrin had no option but to agree. When he finished his lamb chop, he barely remembered having tasted it. He headed back to ring at a near run, leaving Robles to fend for himself and to toss his knife. 
Rennly had taken to the ring against an Orioles man who looked like his uglier cousin hardened by the sun and tough living brought out his spots. While older than Rennly, his age had not made him craftier with the staff. 
“Point Blue. Point Blue.” The referee called as Rennly slapped the man around the ring like a simple farmer. The man lost quickly but with a grin on his face. Tomrin heard him tell another man who could have been his dumber brother: “Least I lost to Rennly Rickot, him all dressed in black I was afraid to really open up. Fear of the Gods and all. Better than some puffed up slave.” 
Tomrin scoffed quietly to himself. There wasn’t going to be enough drink left over in the tarsk tent by the time the competition was over. He congratulated Rennly with a nod and went in search of Robles or maybe his sister Emy, anyone with half a brain. 
Or anyone not trying to brain him.
Chapter 17: A Feathered Thing
	And man shall become the one with the Sword, 
 And with it he shall swiftly unravel their cosmos.
		—From The Dark Verses

Robles’s knife sank into the target’s bull’s eye with a hollow thud in the hot afternoon air. 
Tomrin ducked under the cordon while the game master recorded and retrieved Robles’ knife to the polite claps of onlookert. The knife had hit the center but not dead center.” What’s the matter?” Tomrin asked Robles. The toss wasn’t even the long one. “How are you missing?”
Robles grinned at him. “I’m not,” he said, wiggling his eyebrows in his conspiratorial way. He was up to something. “I have an idea. It came to me when I realized I could be up against Rennly as well.” 
“Oh?” Tomrin said, “What are you thinking?” 
Robles didn’t respond instantly but waited for the recorder to return his knife and for the man to let Tomrin know that he needed to move back. “You’ll see, if you lose.” 
“I could still win,” Tomrin replied and headed behind the audience line. Rennly was good, but he was still beatable. Unless he was holding back like Robles. Tomrin dismissed that idea and thought it would be nice to beat Rennly after everything, the petty slights and thrown dirt clods.
Robles tossed his thirty-paces knife throw. Thufh. 
“What are you doing here?” Rennly asked in Tomrin’s right ear. “The Gorkles are calling your name.” 
Tomrin swung about to glance at the man. “Feathers,” he said. “Thank you.” He pushed through the crowd. He didn’t turn around to see if Rennly and his goons were following until he reached the pavilion; they hadn’t. 
Tomrin checked in. “You were supposed to be here when your name was called,” the referee told him as he tied the yellow ribbon on his arm, a breach of protocol but Tomrin wasn’t going to say anything other than his sorries.
He stole a look at his opponent. The man with his wife was comforted his young boy, barely more than a toddler. His blue steamer was already tied in place. The referee called them to the ring and the man handed his unhappy son to the woman and she handed him his staff.
Tomrin squared off with the young Rubish father and bowed over their staves as the man dis the same. The staff felt light after the oak one and he jabbed with the butt, making the first move. The man countered, hesitating slightly. He was not the dark horse Rennly feared. 
The man’s wife called to her man, and though Tomrin had heard his name before, he finally recognized him. Foby Doormaker had been to the carpentry shop on several occasions. Older than Hadrus by a year or two, he had been friendly.
As his staff touched Foby’s chest, legs and arms, Tomrin made sure not to hurt him.
The referee called out the yellow and blue points as they traded blows, but the match grew lopsided with Foby’s staff only striking Tomrin across the forearm and thigh for two points. Foby sweated worse than a pig when the ten point spread was breached.
Tomrin bowed over his staff to Foby and shook his hand. “Good match,” he said and adjusted the sweat band on his forehead. It was soaked with sweat. 
“I don’t know,” Foby wheezed. “You took me apart.” 
Tomrin rubbed his arm. “You got in a couple of good ones too.” 
Foby smiled and then thanked Tomrin for going easy on him. The man walked out the ring rubbing his chest--massaging the only strike that really connected. His wife handed him back his son and Tomrin thought the woman seemed more relieved than anything. 
Tomrin had heard a loud clapping from a section of the crowd and turned to his father, Dable standing with Rennly and Robles. Tomrin returned his streamer and staff then headed over to them as the clerk called out the names of the next two contestants. 
Dable clapped his hand on Tomrin. “That was a good bout!” he said. “Now I need to check on the animals.” 
“I hope you take it that easy on me,” Rennly said. But it was clear what he meant, when he added: “Not sure I have the same level of control.” 
“Just don’t break his fingers,” Robles said. “We all need those working glass.” 
“Don’t you two have knives to throw at each other?” Tomrin asked, not looking forward to his fated match with Rennly. 
“And that’s why we don’t let Tomrin touch sharp things,” Robles said, “He hasn’t quite got the rules down yet.” 
Tomrin jabbed a finger at Robles chest, not touching him, “Pointy end goes in here.” 
“Right,” Robles said, and turned to Rennly. “We should get back to it.” 
“Worried, Robles?” Rennly asked. 
“Worried? Nothing but my pride on the line, so of course I’m worried!” Robles’ hysterics sounded real, but he was up to something. He’d already admitted as much. 
Flash [?] 
At the knife throw competition, others tossed knives while Robles and Rennly watched and waited. 
Rennly acted cool, calm, and in control, confident of success at both, though he did hurry back to the staff competition as it was close to time for his second match. “I don’t want to be late like someone we know.”
“It’s going to be a nightmare,” Tomrin said. “Having Rennly around.” The man was worse than his mother, always finding fault. 
“Hmm,” Robles grunted. “It won’t be that bad. And if it is, we can always kill him.”
“A pleasant thought,” Tomrin said. “But, no. I hope whatever you have planned works, killing a censor, even Rennly, would never do.” 
Robles grinned. “Maybe it won't come to that.”
“It won’t,” Tomrin said, and headed to the Gorkel tent. The throbbing mass of knotted evil growing in his chest wasn’t him. I am above it.
As he walked he hoped on a feather it was true.
A Bug [?]
At the competition pavilion, Rennly made his second win seem so effortless, as if it came naturally. 
The next few bouts flew by:amateur against amateur. 
Robles returned and Rennly walked over when Dable came from the animals, in his hands a blue ribbon, the satin of it shining in the westing sun. “I see the fun’s not over,” he said, beaming, over-pleased with himself. 
“Not yet, Master Ocrin,” Rennly said. 
“First place, best she-goat,” Robles read.
 “Congratulations, Dable,” Rennly said, adding his own warmth.
The announcer called Tomrin’s name, and because he spent an extra moment congratulating his father, he wasn’t able to select the staff he wanted, the same from the first round. The one he picked was nearly identical but he could feel the difference, and it bugged at him. And itt bugged him that it bugged him. Feathered superstitions. The smooth yew staff was every bit as good as his opponent’s.
Capal Tassas swirled the thing for his Orish friends then swung it like a woodcutter chopping wood. The yew howled through the air.  Kwoof. He turned to face off with Tomrin swinging as he stepped into the ring. Grinning wickedly he continued pulverizing the air. Kwoof. Kwoof, kwoof. He paused to speak. “I’ll try not to hurt you—not too bad,” he said. 
“I’ll try not to as well,” Tomrin said, and bowed, unsure of what his own words meant. Capal grunted a laugh and lashed out and struck Tomrin  a quick blow to the arm. “Point blue!” 
Rennly jerked. “Don’t beat him too bad, Capal,” he shouted. “That’s my job.” People several laughed. Tomrin danced to take a glance at who. Dable was one of them. He slap Rennly on the back.
Capal, and his staff, forced Tomrin to pay attention. Woof-flack! 
The Orish man continued to attack, his staff raised like a blacksmith’s hammer. His next swing was off-balance and poorly executed. Woof-tunt. The whiff of his staff rustled the hair on Tomrin’s arm as he let the blow go to his side to the ground. Tomrin, slapped the man’s middle. Fwap, then spun to deflect a counter stroke. Point yellow. The man’s friend laughed. 
Angry strength made no match of it after that and the fight was essentially over then. Clack, fwap. Clack, fwap. “Hold still you little rat,” Capal muttered angrily as Tomrin delivered the tenth point for yellow.
Soon after the referee called “Match. Yellow.” Capal had only touched him once and that was his sneak attack and a glancing blow at best. 
The man would not win best-in-show.
Games Inside Games [?]
“Now, those two fight for third place,” Tomrin said after he joined Dable, Robles, and Rennly. 
“Hmm, yes,” Rennly agreed. “No dark horse to upset our little game.” 
Marten walked over to them. The big Orish counselor held a satchel of clay-red leather. “Gentleman,” he said, nodding. 
“Who’s this?” Dable asked. 
“Dable,” Robles said, “Meet counselor Marten from Menad. Marten, Dable Ocrin, Tomrin’s father.” 
Marten bowed again as Dable’s hand remained at his side. Dable disliked Orish men. “Not from Menad, but still a pleasure,” Marten said. “And gentlemen, your contract is ready for your perusal and signing.” He tapped his satchel with a meaty hand. 
“We need a table,” Tomrin said. 
“I could certainly go for another scone,” Robles said. “Winning is hungry work.”
“We’ll see about that,” Rennly said.
Dable led the way to the baker’s booth as they made quite a parade of it: two Orioles men—one a censor—another man Rubish yet in the pilgrim white with his Peregrine half-breed son, all followed by anlarge Orish man dressed in the latest style from Zircos. 
The Contact [?]
Each paid their own way at the window. 
When it was Tomrin’s turn he ordered his scone with raspberry jelly without currants--unlike his father who asked for extra. 
After they polished off their snacks Tomrin glanced around. It was like he and the others were an exhibit and people goosenecked when Marten pulled out the papers and a small inkwell and quill he had stashed in his satchel. “Read it,” the Orish man said. “But as an impartial source, you can trust everything is in order. And fair.” 
An older Rubish walked over. “And what you fellows up to?”
Tomrin had met the man before, but had since forgotten his name. The man had once wanted some woodwork done by Dable. Tomrin had forgotten what as well. What he did remember was his father calling the man a gossip and a miser. Yet that had stopped Dable from taking on his job if Tomrin remembered correctly. 
“Seems the boys have a bit of a bet going on with the staves, Nuttel,” Dable said. “Big money’s riding on it.” 
“Actually, there’s no money—” Tomrin said, correcting his father.
Robles stopped him, chopping the air and grimacing. “Nothing riding on the staves,” he said. “But this is a big money contract: all on the glass shop in Menad,.” 
“Glass?” Master Nuttel snorted. “Tin’s good enough for me. I see no need for fancy glass. Just going to break anyhow.” 
“That just means repeat business,” Robles replied smoothly. 
“I suppose it does,” Master Nuttel said, thoughtfully. “If only it wasn’t all a bunch of sorcery.” 
The man tottered, pushing through the aisle of benches, muttering to himself.
The Mighty Pen [?]
Tomrin was happy to see him leave.
“Let’s just sign this nonsense and get it over with,” he said. 
“Settle down,” Robles told him. Clearly none of this was getting to him. It was like he enjoyed it. But then again, he wasn’t the one Rennly was learning with the others; he was not the one about to feel the brunt of Rennly’s nasty side.
“If you aren’t going to sign I will,” Tomrin said and snatched up the quill. “Hand me the paper.” 
“The contract,” Marten said, sliding it to him. 
The man’s script was large and flowing; Tomrin couldn’t focus on it. He found his name at the bottom of the page and scratched his signature with is quill then dropped it back into the inkwell. “I’ll meet you in the Gorkel’s ring,” he said to Rennly then turned and left the tent.
As he walked past couple of strapping Rubish bucks he realized he was frustrated and angry. You can’t be angry, he told himself. That was how the demons got inside. Anger he’d read was how they tricked you. It was how their evil became part of the Mark, and once used, there was no hiding from Daughters, censors, or the gods—or so he’d read. I’m a good person. He desperately wanted to believe it. As he walked, he found the anger dissipating.
By the time he sighed in at the staves pavillion, the anger was gone but now a nervous energy filled and he played out scenarios in his head. Some he won, most he lost.
In the ring, the men fought for a shot at third place, possibly even second. They sparred, and though Tomrin watched, he didn’t see them. The fair and its people moved and lived, and enjoyed themselves all around him, their voices and laughter and calls washing over him, unheard. 
Their lives were outside his understanding, and he lost himself in quiet contemplation.
Under a Westing Sun  [?]
“Going to win?” Robles said. 
Tomrin started, his revelry broken. He’d been thinking about glass and wanting to get back to Menad, planning on leaving as soon as the competition was over. “I don’t know,” he said. “But I feel like pounding Rennly into the dirt.” His flat words held no heat. 
“So you do think you can win?” 
Tomrin grunted. “Can you beat him with the knives?” 
“After tossing a sucker or two?” Robles said. “Easy.” 
“Tell me what’s going on.” 
“The backup plan, if you lose?” Robles asked. 
“So confident in me.”
“When robbing a censor, always have an escape route, I say” 
“We aren’t robbing him,” Tomrin said, though it did feel like Rennly was stealing something from him. What exactly Tomrin couldn’t say. Fighting for money was undignified, and gambling went against his belief in his ability to use his mind—not crude muscles and luck. Feathered Rennly, he thought but muttered: “Feathered Woolad.” Somehow the sun burnt hotter now in the west. “Feather them all.” 
“You may not want to say that overly loud,” Robles cautioned. 
“I know,” Tomrin said. The evil was speaking for him and it frightened him. It was like parts of him were flying loose. “This thing between Rennly and I—I thought it was over.” 
“Well, here he comes,” Robles said, not helping.
A Honey Lash [?]
Rennly came from the direction of the knife toss. “I’m going to beat you both,” he said. “I certainly hope you two are better at glass than you are at the martial arts or my golden ducks are going to fly away and never return.”
Tomrin pretended to watch the bout for a minute while he stewed. The artless clack of staff on staff, a discordant tune in his ears. The need to strike at Rennly, to cut him down, to cut down his pride grew too strong to ignore, and Tomrin turned to him filled with a base contempt. “You think you know our skills so well,” he said. “But you are wrong.”
“Oh, really?”
“You will not. And if you think I am wrong, let’s change the wager. Beat us both and you will have a voice.”
“I already have a voice,” Rennly said. 
“Not inside the shop you don’t. We are the creators. We are the artists, the craftsmens. We are the masters and chiefs—we—Robles and I. We see more deeply than you know and not only glass. But with glass we are its gods.”
Rennly grunted.
“Um, I’m not really that good,” Robles said. “And, I think maybe the heat’s getting to Tomrin.” 
Rennly didn’t blink but glared at Tomrin. Tomrin, however, was not finished, and though he didn’t know what Robles planned for the knife toss he was convinced his friend could and would beat Rennly. Armed with Robles’s confidence he slid his barb home. “If you beat us both, you get a voice inside the shop, but if one of us beats you, I decide what night of the week we meet.”
“You boys still making bets?” Dable asked as he stepped from the path. He and Marten walked together like two men had come to some great understanding, friendly yet diffidently on both their parts. The big Orish man didn’t loom over Dable but looked like a larger, more sophisticated man walking with another man who was large in his own right, both seemingly grand in their own individual ways: Marten, neat, and Dable in his white cashmere robe, clean. Both acted satisfied, even Dable, despite his question. 
A group of three Rubish men trailed behind them. T
omrin recognised them as three of the richest men in Woolad. One he was certain was Penn Rejal.
“Amendments cost extra,” Marten said. 
“Just working out some final question of leadership is all,” Robles said, sounding annoyed. He flashed a sidelong look at Tomrin. 
Tomrin shrugged it off. Rennly needed to learn his place. “That is if Censor Richot wants to show us how it’s done.” 
“Fine,” Rennly said, clearly as annoyed as Robles. “I like this. I agree. Knives are first after all.” 
“Now knives?” one of the men asked. He was old, his hair white and he dressed worse than the other two, a real codger, his shirt and pants patched, making him seem all the more miserly. “How uncivilized,” he added.
Tomrin agreed silently to himself, wondering if he’d misjudged the man.
Sleight of Hand [?]
At the knife toss pavilion a crowd had formed. 
The words bet and gold and ducks sailed through in the air. Nuttel spoke loudly and Tomrin didn’t have to wonder how everyone knew about their little wager. 
The knife toss’ grandmaster asked if the staff bout was over. Clearly Robles and Rennly had delayed their final showdown until after the staves’ champion had been chosen. 
“Change of plans,” Rennly explained as he walked up to the first line. “Knives first. After I beat Master Robles here, I’ll be ready to beat Master Tomrin.”
Robles hissed in Tomrin’s ear. “We wanted to wait in case you won.” 
“And If I lose?” Tomrin asked in a whisper. 
“Never mind,” Robles replied. “Too late now.” He waved to two boys calling his name and walked over to the boys and shook their hands as if he was running for mayor. He didn’t seem the least bit worried about planting his knife in his bale’s bullseye.
Rennly tossed his knife and it stabbed his own bulleye. 
Tomrin brushed the wound on his chest. Maybe it was just the heat, but his head was full of pressure and there was nothing he could do for it but scratch his itch. Even that didn’t seem to help. 
Finally, Robles took his position and, pulling out his knife, tossed it in one smooth motion, flicking almost absently. Thuth. Bullseye. 
He and Rennly each retrieved his own knives in this final round. 
The game master gocked with everyone else as they took their positions on the second last line.
Dangerous Men [?]
“After you,” Rennly said, unease in his voice. Perhaps it was dawning on him that Robles was a challenge after all.
“Certainly,” Robles replied. Threw his knife, making small, but still little show of it, lining up for a whole second before sending his knife into the bullseye once more. He was toying with Rennly.
Rennly made two practice motions before his own knife flew the fifteen paces and found a bullseye of its own. For him, as with Robles’ throw, there was a round of polite claps as the record keeper announced the bullseyes. 
Then with their knives in hand, they moved to the far rope strung across the dirt at twenty paces. 
This time Rennly went first. He sized up the target and—for reasons beyond Tomrin’s understanding—his own knife. He wanted to crack a wise one, but ice filled his chest cavity with doubt and he held his tongue with everyone else. 
Rennly lobbed the knife. It spun with a languid arc before stabbing the bale’s outer bullseye. Thurk. 
People clapped. 
“A good throw,” Robles said, then tucked his knife away in its sheath at his hip.
Rennly frowned. “Conceding?”
Tomrin’s own heart skipped and thudded in his chest. What are you doing?
“No, I’m just going to throw the way I’ve always practiced.” Robles replied, turning to the crowd and Tomrin. “Knives may not be as civilized, but they are a lot of fun.” He looked right at Tomrin and he walked over and winked, wearing a large grin on his lupine face. “Say when.”
“What?” Tomrin asked. “When?” He didn’t have time to blink. 
Robles stood ten paces from the throw line, all the way to the ropes that held everyone else out, but his hand went to his hip faster than an adders’ strike. He spun and the knife exited the sheath at his hip. The knife didn’t even seem to enter his hand. It was like Robles slapped it and it flew free of its leather case, button popping. Clith. The knife didn’t arc as it flew, but struck the bale like iced lightning. Cathud. It buried itself past the hilt, a dead bullseye.
Just as suddenly another knife tricked into Robles’ other hand. It glinted and shot through the air and sunk into Rennly’s bale. Thud. Another dead on bullseye. 
“Bam, bam, both!” Robles said as he turned and bowed, his arms held wide open to the cheering and clapping crowd. 
The old codger, however, didn’t seem impressed. “Still don’t know how any of this has a feathered thing to do with founding glass,” he said. 
Tomrin found himself agreeing with the man as Rennly’s eyes bugged, twitching with repressed rage. 
Chapter 18: The Price of Failure
	Even the gods place their trust in gold.
		--A Rubish saying

Robles proudly displayed his first-place ribbon, pinning it on his chest with a bodkin from his pack. 
“I am the hero of the hour!” he said, smiling soaking in the adulation.
“Never has any one competition, in my memory, ever elicited such interest,” Tomrin agreed. “But you are a bit of a showman. I bet you have another silly trick in your pack right now.” Often or not, they were just simple blacksmith’s puzzles, a small sword tapped or threaded into a toy anvil. Or rings—the point of which was to extract one from the others. He would make some off-hand remark about their ultimate meaning, often announcing a silly prize like becoming king. Corundum hadn’t a king in years, not since the Emperor returned. “So hurry now, your hour is nearly up!”
	“True, true,” Robles said.
Rennly, however, was not amused. “I’ve fallen in with a pair of vipers,” he’d said walking past them, stuffing his second-place ribbon in his pocket.
	The crowd at the knife booth followed as they headed for the staves pavilion.
At the Gorkel tent, the referee chided Tomrin and Rennly. “I was going to forfeit the both of you,” he said. “And give first place to Medza.” 
“And have a riot in your hand?” Robles asked loudly to a round of laughter. 
The referee frowned and tossed up his hands. “Well, are you two finally ready?” he said, and stomped over to the scorekeeper, his brother. There was a smattering of cheers, but Medza seemed crestfallen. Tomrin couldn’t blame the man. He also wished their round had been canceled, if for other reasons.
Rennly muttered something as he picked out his staff.
“What what that?” Tomin asked.
“I said Henk and Ressel are probably lost in a shell of tarsk right now, and I have no one to tie my streamer.” 
Tomrin glanced to the crowd, to where Robles and Dable and Marten and the town patriarchs stood chatting as they waited for the bout to start. Tomrin assumed Rennly meant his two censor friends. “Have Robles do it.” Tomrin said. 
“So, kind of you to offer, not your own help, but someone else ” Rennly said and stomped off.
Tomrin picked up his staff feeling annoyed. He tried to make sense of Rennly, but couldn’t. Retrieving his yellow cloth streamer from Mistress Gorkle, he brought it over to his father Dable to tie next to Rennly and Robles. “Thanks, Papa,” he said after Rennly stomped back into the ring. 
“Rennly has his hackles up,” Dable said. “Be on your toes.” 
A Round [?]
Tomrin glanced over at Rennly.
With his blue streamer tied, Rennly had taken up a spot across the ring and stood with his staff in both hands in front of him horizontally, waiting. The referee stood to the side. Both stared at Tomrin. 
Tomrin flexed his arm to make sure his yellow streamer wasn’t tied too tight and he glanced back at Robles.
His Orioles friend raised his eyebrows. “Yes?”
“What bet were you going to make with Rennly?” 
“Don’t worry about that,” he replied. “Just get in there and rearrange his face for me.” 
“I’ll be lucky if he doesn’t rearrange mine,” Tomrin said and turned back to the ring, stepping over the rope circle.
The referee explained the critical rules. Points for strikes only. No grappling. No head shots. If anyone fell, no hitting them until they were back up. Tomrin had heard it all before, plenty of times. They would play to fifty or until the first person had a ten strike lead. 
On the referee’s signal Tomrin bowed to Rennly. Rennly bent slightly. His eyes gleamed a pale green in the deceptively low sun. The first day, the fun day of Sheep Shearing Days, was nearing over. They bowed upright and Tomrin shifted to his left, circling watching Rennly’s staff like a hawk. Rennly circled as his staff probed.
For a moment they traded blows, each catching the other’s staff with their own, deflecting the strikes. Clat, clat! Clat, clat! Tomrin swung his staff high at Rennly’s shoulders, putting power into it while maintaining some semblance of defense. Rennly ducked as his staff flowed up and at an angle. Tomrin’s staff went high, Rennly swung low.
 Tomrin dodged, jumping backwards. “Ha!” Rennly said. Moving backwards was a show of ineptitude. It was the right move though and Tomrin grimaced, reassuring himself as he and Rennly circled tapping staves, each continuing to probe for weakness. Nat, nat. Nat, nat. 
Rennly smiled. He wanted this and was playing before he got on with it. Tomrin struck out with a wild blow. Rennly blocked it with the middle of his staff. Clatch. His counterattack came swiftly. Clack!  With each set of his heavy blows--two one-handed Blacksmith Hammers, and a third set of back and forth Holy Threshers--Rennly’s grin slowly faded. Clack, clack! Flutch, fletch. Flackk! 
The power in his swings sent vibrations into Tomrin’s hands and pain erupted in his knuckles. Slowly, his finger numbed to the pain and his hands merged with the wood of the staff. “Is that all you have?” Tomrin asked through clenched teeth. 
Rennly sneered. “What about you? Are you even remotely trying?”
As they circled Rennly continued to probe. The crowd watched in silence. One face alone stood out, Counselor Marten’s. The look of concern was gone from his eyes. Once a soldier, he now watched with a soldier’s eye, blank of all emotion. A slight nod of his head was his salute. Given what Margretta had said about the man, he had probably come as protection--now powerless in his task.
Rennly’s staff clacked against Tomrin’s. Tomrin lashed out with an open blow, swinging wildly with his staff.
Rennly countered. Clack. His staff stabbed Tomrin in the thigh. “Point blue!” 
The pain was shocking and Tomrin was certain he’d be bruised to the bone.
The Luster [?]
“Give it back to him, Tomrin!” a voice cried out. 
Bethany Karlite was in the crowd. Her presence added a strange nervousness to his anger, and his feet needed his conscious control as Tomrin stumbled around in the dusty ring. 
Rennly swung his staff, and he blocked. Clack. Tomrin stepped. Clack. Again Rennly swung. Clack. Tomrin edged his staff, up and against Rennly’s shoulder as his power sapped his finesse. “Point Yellow,” called the referee. Clack, clack. Tomrin blocked Rennly’s counter attack. Clack.
Their feet pounding at the dirt filled the air with choking orange fume as the sun filtered sideways under the pavilion. Tomrin began to vie for the light against Rennly, each trying to keep it at their backs to the sun and it out of their eyes.
Rennly continued to rain down blows. Each strike he gained, Tomrin repaid—if much softer. When Rennly’s staff found its way against Tomrin’s streamer, he struck Rennly’s ankle. When Rennly smacked Tomrin on the chest, he jabbed him in the leg. 
Finally, Tomrin let himself pant. He was wearing down and he feared he was going to lose after all. Feathers, he swore. His heavy breathing dried his throat and he was sore. His heart pounded and the mass of evil inside was pounding with it, wanting to come out. 
Rennly swung at Tomrin like he was closing a heavy door with both hands. Tomrin stepped in to block him, taking advantage of Rennly’s awkward two-handed motion. But Rennly swing was a trick, worthy of Robles. Their staves connected and Rennly’s staff jammed down on Tomrin’s foot. It crushed his foot through the boot. Cruk. 
“Feather!” Tomrin swore. 
“Hurt?”
“You broke something.” 
“As long as it wasn’t your hands,” Rennly said. “You’ll need those to pay me back.” 
“I’ll pay you back,” Tomrin said, hobbling now to keep up their martial dance. 
“He’s hurt! Call the match!” Tomrin heard the Orish counselor call out, there were hushed noises coming from the crowd. Tomrin could no one now through the glare as he hopped about like a one-legged crow.
“No!” he said, “I’m fine!” He was mad as a hornet, but strangely calm, and when he looked at Rennly he saw what he was looking at. “You are nothing but a boy, Rennly, a bully, because your father beat you.”
“My father never laid a finger on me.”
“You’re a liar and a fraud.”
“And you’re nothing but a Peregrine half-breed slave, overreaching his station.” 
“Me overreaching?” Tomrin replied. “I have created my own fortunes. I’m not trying to buy or inherit one.” 
Rennly struck another blow for blue and laughed.  “Can’t you tell I’m just toying with you now? You have no tricks like Robles.” 
True. Tomrin thought, yet the evil mass inside his chest throbbed, calling to him. He could feel its terrible power. Corrupt though it was—or because of the corruption—the Luster called to him now more seductively than it had before. It shouted now, promising power greater than the Leviathan’s own terrible might. You could do anything! Rennly was a bug compared to the power the Luster promised. Defy the god—and the demons both! Set yourself up as king! No emperor! And not just of Corundum, but Gearthrum itself! And Serathus besides! He was special—not cursed. Gold! Power! Nothing would be denied him. Nothing and no one would stand in his way. A tyrant to end all tyrants. His staff rod for smiting his enemies and correcting his allies. 
Tomrin shook his head and focused on the pain in his foot. The Luster was a demon’s trick.
He smiled to himself. He would not let them or Rennly push him around.
A Moral Victory [?]
“What are you smiling at?” Rennly demanded as he swung his staff high. 
Tomrin ducked. A head strike was illegal if he had let it go through it would be a point for him, not Rennly, but a point was nothing compared to a staff in the face. Tomrin didn’t need points. Now win or lose, he had already won the important concession in the knife throw. He had just beaten the seductive Luster. Now all he had to do was deny Rennly what he wanted most—to hurt him. “Wouldn’t you like to know?” Tomrin said. “But you are not my judge nor my executioner. You are just a couple of golden ducats to me, nothing more. Dress up in black and still you are nothing to nobody.” 
“You don’t know anything,” Rennly hissed as Tomrin blocked a blow with the rattliing end of his staff. 
“I know you think Dabel is your real father,” Tomrin said as Rennly slashed wildly with his staff and Tomrin’s staff struck him in the leg. Point yellow. “You want his fortunes, but as long as I and Hadras stand in your way, you get nothing.” Rennly said nothing but slammed his staff against Tomrin’s as if trying to drive him to the ground, his eyes filled with cold hatred as Tomrin held him with his staff though his bad foot ached like it was carrying all of his and Rennly’s weight together. “And you will never be his great son,” Tomrin continued. “Can’t you see? He loves Hadras most of all?”
Someone in the crowd wondered aloud what the two of them were waiting for.
Tomrin redirected Rennly’s staff and delivered a strike, clipping Rennly’s elbow. Point Yellow.
A pained surprise filled Rennly’s eyes with angry heat.
But the heat cooled quickly and turned mean.
Tomrin fended blow after blow, many aimed at his bad leg. Tomrin was just thankful it wasn’t his chest. He feared the burn wound would split open and begin to bleed.
On One Foot [?]
In Rennly’s single-mindedness, Tomrin easily kept the scoring close.
Soon, however, they both began to tire. Fatigue slacked Rennly’s face. He was finally conserving energy for his attacks. He circled slower and slower, to the point that Tomrin feared a trick. None came as they fought on. Then again it wasn’t beyond Rennly to milk the full fifty strikes. 
I can still win this, Tomrin thought as his and Rennly’s staves clacked against each other in their interminable dance. The crowd cheered each strike, counting up the points for yellow and blue without waiting for the scorekeeper to announce their points.
With a quick blow to Tomrin’s forearm, Rennly broke forty first.
Tomrin returned the strike. One more welt for both was just one more. 
“Yellow point,” the referee called. 
The crowd called out thirty-nine. 
Rennly lashed out with his staff, leaving himself exposed across the chest. His staff struck Tomrin’s shoulder. Fack. Forty. Tomrin returned the favor. Flack. Forty-one for yellow. 
Then Rennly’s staff slapped Tomrin chest and his mind emptied at the pain of the blow even though it had missed a Mark by an inch. “Ahh!” he cried.
Rennly smiled, cruelly, but Tomrin could barely see him as his eyes blurred up.
To Fifty [?]
His step-brother struck another two quick blows: arm, shoulder, but compared to the chest wound, those strikes hurt not a bit.
Tomrin dropped into a defensive stance and he held the staff more in the center. He wiped his eyes between the blows Rennly threw at him as he gave up ground. Clack, clack. The Blacksmith’s Hammer came down over and over. Clack, clack! Clach! Clach! Clach!
Rennly’s staff shattered. Clash! That wasn’t supposed to happen, but before Tomrin could score a strike the referee yelled. “Halt!” 
Rennly tossed what was left of his staff out of the ring, kicking the other half with him as he walked to the barrel to select a new weapon.
Tomrin wiped his eyes fully, breathing heavily as if he were a man surviving some great shock. 
Rennly strode back into the ring, brandishing his fresh staff like a flail. 
Tomrin changed back into the standard foot forward pose like a man serious about staves. When Rennly attacked, all his father’s training came back. Maybe with his fists, Rennly had strength to make up for his lack of skill. But staves were not fists. 
Tomrin turned Rennly’s attacks against him and held his staff like an extension of himself. He struck Rennly, and despite his skill, Rennly struck him too, but the hits no longer hurt. They were desperate strikes from a desperate, grasping man, whose jealous eyes betrayed his own fear of losing. 
They circled the ring, Rennly pushing Tomrin back around the rope with his remaining strength, but what appeared like weakness was strategy. Tomrin feint one way then abruptly change directions; each time he made a strike at Rennly’s legs, Rennly would counter, but many times he missed his strike and their staves clattering together. 
Before long they were tied at forty-nine. 
Over the shouting crowd Robles howled at him. “Finish him, Tomrin!” Robles shouted. “Chew his legs off!” 
Dusk settled as they circled. 
In the descending twilight, irritation settled in Rennly’s green eyes. “You’re messing with me?” he said as he worked his staff more cautiously now. 
Only habit kept Tomrin’s staff from falling out of his hands. Just one move point and he’d be champion. “I am not a bully like you, Rennly,” he said. “If anyone is dragging it out, it’s you.”
Rennly charged and swung with the power equal to any Orish farmhand. It was a wonder the new staff didn’t break like the old one. Slamming it into Tomrin’s staff, clack, he drove it back back against Tomrin’s body, the haft of it just touching him below the jaw on the side of his neck. 
“Point blue!” the referee roared. “Blue the winner!”
Tomrin’s counter hit Rennly in the leg. But the match was over, the crowd cried, “Fifty! Fifty!” drowning out the score keeper.
Best Loser [?]
For a second Tomrin stood confused, thinking he had won. The tap on his neck hadn’t even hurt, he’d blocked it down too little more than a kiss. I lost? 
The crowd flooded into the ring to congratulate them both. Robles was yelling in his ear. “Now that was a fight!” 
The Gorkles however were yelling at everyone. “We’re not done!” Stay back! There is still another bout. We need to decide second place! We still have to decide second place!” 
Tomrin was exhausted; he had no interest in fighting again, not for second place, not even if it were for first now. His foot hurt to put weight on it, and every muscle in his body hurt from one of Rennly’s strike. Tomrin had no reason to care about second place, yet he was grateful that the crowd finally pulled back so he could breathe. Yet when they did, the staff was the only thing keeping him from falling over. 
“I’m not fighting for second place,” he told the referee. 
“What? You want to forfeit?” the man sounded incredulous, as it was unheard of. He clearly didn’t understand the pain in his foot. 
“Well, “Tomrin replied. “All I want is a tall tin of tarsk.” Rennly smirked at him, but Tomrin didn’t care what Rennly thought anymore. He was just a lunk of muscle and not even that good at staves.
The referee frowned and raised his eyebrows in surprise at Tomrin’s acceptance. “I guess you are happy with third?” 
“No, he doesn’t place if he forfeits,” the Gorkel matriarch who took their name and money said. “The rules are quite clear.” 
Dable who had left the ring with the others, spoke from the side-lines. “What are you saying, Carnila?” He was frowning and his eyes glinted darkly in the twilight. He walked over to her as she tumbled through her rule book. Not all games had rules laid out in books but games like the staves competition were institutions going back to the beginning, its rules passed down for years long before being written down. 
Carnila put her finger down on a page and read. “An adult player who forfeits may not place in his competition.” 
“May not. May,” Dable said, as he braved Carnila at her own table. “He may not—but he may as well.” 
“But may not,” Carnila replied stoutly.
Tomrin hobbled over on his staff and good foot. He was afraid his father was going to make a fuss. 
The referee followed at Tomrin’s side. “Let me take a look, Mother,” the man said.
“May means he still could,” Dable insisted. 
“Dable Ocrin,” Carnila said, “I think I know how to need the rule book, it’s been in my family for twenty generations, since before the Leviathan cracked the World Egg.” 
Tomrin doubted that, but instead of arguing with her, he tried to console his father. “It’s just a game. I only entered the competition to satisfy the contract.” It sounded stupid, and his father turned on him. 
“And what about the prize money?” 
“A few silvers, who cares?” 
“You should take on the other challenger, you’ll beat Forny easily.” 
Tomrin shook his head and walked over to the barrel and dropped the stick. Tuntd. He turned and hobbled towards Robles. 
“That’s a forfeit!” Carnila called to the crowd and they started talking more loudly.
“Good work,” Robles said.
“Was it?”
“You survived.” 
“And I guess that’s all I needed to do.” Tomrin replied. “Tarsk?”
“After the ribbons are passed out.”
Rennly walked towards them as he escorted Dable away from Carnila’s table. “Good bout,” Renny said, grinning. “I look forward to our next one.” 
Dable shook his head at Tomrin. “I don’t understand why you didn’t just finish.” 
“Because I’m hurt, and don’t need to be hurt any further,” Tomrin said. 
“But the glory,” Dable persisted. 
“I don’t care about glory.”
The referee raised his voice to ask for silence. “I’m going to announce the winners,” he said, holding up three pouches of leather and ribbons tied to each of the coin purses. As he called out second and third, two winners gathered their prizes in turn. Then Rennly won the large purse and the blue ribbon tied to it. He smiled a gloating smile as he walked back to them, as if his win mattered. “Now,” the referee continued. “For best-in-show!” The crowd clapped heavily. Always one of the children won—a double consolation prize. It was always chosen to drum up interest for the game the following year. He hoped that it went to Mathis; having seen him fight, he had skill and had made a good showing. The crowd grew quiet. 
“For best-in-show.” The referee repeated, then blinking in the dusk he read the final winner’s name. “Tomrin Ocrin!” 
There was a stunned moment of silence while the crowd digested what it heard. 
“That’s feathered right!” Robles shouted, and the crowd erupted in cheering as Tomrin re-entered the ring.
As he left, ribbon in hand, he was thankful the darkness hid the pools of tears eyes.
Chapter 19: Tarsk Town
	For his path is laid clear:
For even in the darkness,
The Mists light the way.
	—From The Dark Verses

Oil torches lit the interior of Tarsk Town, a tent complex run by the proprietors of a local tavern called the Ugly Twin. Tomrin and Robles entered through the Shanty Town entrance where the murmur of happy voices and laughter peeled the loudest. Crude humor flew out of months as fast as the Orish serving girl helped the patrons all but toss tarks down their throats. The tent reeked of bodies and the tins here were tin and the drinks were a copper each, and payable on service. For the patrons, two Orish men were shouting at each other the loudest, each comparing each other’s looks to the posterior of different farm animals as their friends laughed. 
Tomrin glanced at Robles. “Should have gone in through the castle entrance,” he muttered. “My foot is throbbing and the ten penny tax would have been worth it.” He’d never been in the Ugly Twins Public House’s Tarsk Town tents before, nor to the Ugly Twins downtown, either. They didn’t serve food, only tarsk. Growing up, the idea of going to the Twins had been out of the question. Robles grinned wryly and pushed through the rough benches to the Merchants’ Quarter entrance.
The Merchant Quarters served high-spirit tarsk as well as low, and the benches were padded. A sign in chalk on a wall explained each drink’s cost. The serving women here were Peregrine, not Orish. Instead of being dressed in rough bodices and skirts, they wore the demure style that had gone out of fashion with the Emperor’s Restoration and the slave tax. 
 Tomrin found it hard to get into the spirit of the theme. “This place is a sty,” he muttered to Robles. Down only to drink, sloppy people lounged here, slurring their speech. At five coppers a tin of the high-spirit tarsk, the Merchants Quarters was a worse den of thieves than was the Shanty Town. 
“Out-of-Towners,” Robles said, but Tomrin was pretty sure he recognised several of the drunken merchants. He knew one of the prettier of the two women waiting on the tables, though he couldn’t place her name. She knew Robles. 
She smiled from ruddy check to ruddy check. “Master Robles, fancy seeing you back in Woolad, yet again.” 
“I never miss Sheep Shearing Days, Timea.” He gave her a peck on the cheek. “It’s like a bad habit I can’t kick.”
“Will you and your friend be joining us?” 
“I’m afraid my friend has a hankering for real tarsk, Timea, and we must continue on.” 
Tomrin’s foot throbbed. If she offered him seat now, he would have taken it, but the crestfallen Timea shooed them on their way. “I’ll be back this way...soon,” Robles told her.
She turned to a nearby table. A Rubish man with the manners of an Orish farmhand needed more high-spirit tarsk and was demanding it loudly. 
At the entrance of the King’s Quarters, an Orish man dressed in red, green, and blue, barred their way. “The bribe is a copper,” the man said, putting a hand on the wooden sword at his hip. “Gentleman,” he added belatedly.
“Is that a penny each, Randy?” Robles asked as he worked his coin purse open. He extracted two copper coins from his leather pouch, and then a third. 
“Well, you two gentlemen look quite prosperous,” Randy said. 
Robles handed the man the two coins. “One for the Emperor and his beautiful daughter, the princess, and one for their most trusted guardsman,” Robles said and Randy’s fingers around the coins. “That’s you, Randy.” 
“Right,” Randy said, blinking. “Right… Right this way,” He bowed awkwardly around his toy sword. 
Robles bowed in return and Tomrin grunted out a thank you as he hobbled into the King’s Quarters’ tent. Here the tables were actual tables, and men and women sat in actual chairs. The smell of sweat was as strong as the smell of real tarsk coloring the air. “We should have come in the back way,” Tomrin said.
“And miss saying hello to Timea?” Robles asked as if that idea were completely out of the question and that Tomrin was daft to suggest it.
Priorities [?]
A heavy set Rubish serving woman called Clara, “Lady Clara,” sat them at one of the empty tables. 
The chair rocked under Tomrin on the uneven ground until he swore he was dizzy. He could now see the prices marked on a linen worked like a tapestry. Real tarsk was ten coppers for a single shell. As he glanced around he noticed that all the tins were made of glass. They looked a bit crude to him, but glass all the same. “The glass tins are a nice touch,” he admitted to Robles when Clara left them to figure out what they wanted. 
“Real tarsk for both of us,” Robles told her when she returned. “And Lady Clara, my fine feathered friend here is a bit of a glass aficionado so can you see that we receive your finest shells?” He slid a copper across the table to her. 
No small feat for such a heavy set woman, Clara curtsied and scooped the coin.  “Of course, lord Robles. Our finest shells.”
“I need to check my foot,” Tomrin said. Sore and stiff all over, his foot worried him most, maybe broken. He peeled off his boot carefully. In the lamp light he could see the top of his foot. It was blue and swollen. 
“Lovely,” Robles said. “Looks like it hurts.” 
Their tarsk arrived. Tomrin removed his foot from the armrest of Robles’ chair, and Robles paid Clara, while Tomrin quaffed a large quantity of the milky fluid then waited for his tongue, lips, mouth, and throat to numb. The shell didn’t look like a shell at all. The clear glass was rippled with a strong heavy base—an interesting design. Not bad. The tarsk too was nice and strong. “Potent,” he said. 
Robles took a sip and concurred. “Not as strong as your father’s, but it will do.” 
The ground swept with last year’s chaff offered soft ground underfoot and the canteen lamps burned their dirty red flames into the air, the loud sounds in the other tents, unmuted by the walls that separated them, continued.  Tomrin drank another sip of his tarsk, anxious for it to get on with its duty. He just wanted the first wave to wash over him. 
Robles slapped him absently, and stood with his glass shell. “That’s Booker.” He nodded his head to the far table. “We should say, hello.” 
Tomrin pointed through the table. “I’m going to rest my foot,” he said. 
Robles shook his head and walked to Booker’s table.
Stolen Moments [?]
Tomrin sipped his tarsk and stuck to his chair.
Finally, the first wave of tarsk hit him and the rumbling of the revelers grew in a distan murmur of voices, almost pleasant. Taking off his other boot prepared to stand, but behind him, a voice, a woman’s voice rolled smoothly over the back of his neck and for a split second froze him. Bethany Karlite was paying off the man in the back entrance, bypassing the Merchant’s Quarter and the Shanty Town tents. She was on her way inside, but instead of money she paid the man with a kiss. “There is more where that came from,” she said. “After your watch, you know where to find me.”
A second wave of tarsk rolled over Tomrin. His vision dimmed yet his mind cleared. The torches flickered and the people glowed and grew out of the chaff strewn on the ground. 
Tomrin perversely hoped Bethany stopped to say hello, yet feared she might. Better that she ignored him and walked on by. Her bribe paid, the man guarding the tent thanked her and she brushed inside. The murmur of her dress against the canvas sent the hair on Tomrin’s arms on end. He stared at his hands on the glass on the lacquered table as if they and it were the most interesting things in the tent. 
“Tomrin Ocrin,” Bethany said, bending over him as she placed a hand on his shoulder. Her jasmine perfume filled his nose. “Drinking tarsk, I see,” she said as she bent up. “And all by yourself.”
“Yes, tarsk,” he murmured. “But, no. Robles is here.” 
Bethany moved around and blocked his view of the tent’s other not-quite-regal denizens. In her dress, she looked as lovely as any queen, her dark hair glowing in the firelight like a crown. Pulling out a chair for herself she sat down opposite him.
Lady Clara swooped in. “What’s your pleasure, Love?” The buxom serving lady said. Bethany turned her smokey gaze on Clara and the two exchanged something in their glances. Lady Clara amended her question. “What would you like, my lady?”
“Low-spirit tarsk,” Bethany replied. “But I’d like one of these fancy tins.” 
“Only best for royalty,” Lady Clara said and scurried off.
In the Eyes [?]
“Rennly is still giving you bruises,” Bethany said as her eyes lighted on the purpling covering Tomrin’s arms.
He didn’t move, but sat perfectly still, his hands glued to the glass and table. Against the leaden weight of his arms, the world pushed up into them. He hated Bethany knowing Rennly beat him now as then. “This is nothing,” Tomrin said. “You should see Rennly.” 
“Really? You finally knock the wool out of him?” 
“Not a scratch.”
Bethany laughed. “I’m sure next time you will beat him soundly.”
Tomrin rubbed the bruise on his left arm. “Next time.” 
“So what are you two fighting over? I heard talk of money?” Bethany asked without stopping. “If I needed money I’d fly off to Corundum.” 
“I’ve been to Corundum,” Tomrin said, not answering her question. 
“Really?” She seemed surprised.
“Briefly, and I don’t want to go back.” 
“Why not?” 
“It stinks—far too many people.” 
Clara returned with a clear glass filled with a yellow drink. When she left, Tomrin asked Bethany what she and Rennly were talking about at the funeral.
“We didn’t say a word to each other.”
“You don’t like him anymore than I do,” Tomrin said. It wasn’t a question, but a surprising revelation.
Bethany stood up. “I won’t speak ill of a censor, Tomrin Ocrin,” she said, suddenly angry.  “I owe Censor Rickot for everything I am.” She flowed past him towards the Merchant Quarter’s tent and disappeared.
Further Dealings [?]
Lady Clara stepped over. “That Mistress Karlite is no good,” she said. 
Before she could say more a man started shouting at the guard at the entrance.
“Ten pennies just to enter! Each? One should be good for all. Not ten each!” Master Rejal’s loud complaining broke the spell over Tomrin’s hands. Pulling them from the table, he ran his fingers through his hair.
“Just pay him, Rejal.” The voice was one of two other men Master Rejal had been with earlier in the day. “We don’t have forever.” 
Dable, Marten, and Rennly, and three old monied men entered paying their bribe in order, perhaps in the order of age. Such were things done in Woolad. Tomrin set his hands back down and the heaviness pushed his shoulders down. The weight was was just the tarsk, but Tomrin couldn’t help but think that the strange feeling was how an emperor might feel when trapped on his golden, gem encrusted throne. 
“That’s my boy,” Dable said loudly. “Best-in-show! I told you that if he was here, we’d find him here!” He clapped Tomrin on the back. Lady Clara stepped away during the commotion as they sat, dragging over chairs to his table.
Grabbing a chair from a table, Robles loped over. “Gentlemen,” he said, setting the chair down with a bow. “Welcome to the Castle.” He sounded like he owned the place and he was its true monarch. Tomrin found himself breathing easier, the weight was still there, but it was a more pleasant sensation. Tarsk. He wanted another and when Clara came over for the others, he had his shell refilled. 
“Now down to business,” Dable said when everyone had drunk from their shells or in Rejal’s case, his tin. The man ordered a low-spirit tarsk. It made Tomrin want to shake his head. The man claimed no worries of a headache in the morning. He was adamant: only one! 
“Yes,” Robles said, steering the conversation deftly to what mattered. “There is money to be made in glass. Gold ducks aplenty.”
Ambush [?]
Tomrin stared at the men gathering themselves and things around him.
The three miserly men were interested in two things: Robles and the talk of gold. Rennly’s face, however, was a mask of pleasant charm, while Dable appeared so satisfied with everything he looked like he might split. Marten though glanced from man to man as much as Tomrin did. When the large Orish counselor caught Tomrin staring at him, he nodded thoughtfully. Tomrin nodded back. If he was here, where was the lady Margretta?
“I really think we should have my daughter-in-law’s brother here,” Rejal said. “He knows glass.” 
“Master Talbat?” Robles asked. “He runs a shop here in town?” 
Rejal nodded. “He does.” 
“I thought so,” Robles said. “And he probably knows something, but I can assure you—” 
“Asking him makes a duck’s feather more sense, than knives and slaves.” Rejal said. 
The man had a point. Too true.
“No offense to your daughter-in-law’s brother, Master Rejal,” Robles said, holding up his glass tin. “When it comes to making glasses such as these, it is child’s play compared to what we are doing at Godly Glassworks. Our lowest skilled worker could do this well. I can do better than any Master Talbat can put out—and that’s not bragging.”
“Sure sounds like it to me,” Rejal replied. No one spoke as he sipped his low-spirit tarsk and set it down. “So, you’re good?” 
“Me good?” Robles asked, setting down his own glass undrank. “I’m decent but I’m hardly the glass master. Even before Master Laz passed away, he was surpassed by a glass worker with twice his skill, maybe more, a true genius of glass.” He pointed at Tomrin. 
“Well—I—ah—” Tomrin stuttered. 
“Well, are you good or not?” Rejal demanded.
“I’m pretty good,” Tomrin said. 
“He invented a new lens the other day,” Robles added. 
Dable laughed. “He’s pretty good, just up and invented new things the other day, like it’s nothing!” He took a swig of his tarsk, emptying his glass in a single go and slamming it down. “That’s how you know he’s my boy!”
Tomrin began formulating a plan to leave. He had the perfect excuse. His foot from the drubbing Rennly gave him was hurting—even through the tarsk. 
“I might be mistaken,” Robles said, “But if I had to guess, I would say you fine gentlemen are looking to invest in Godly Glassworks.” He turned to the men in turn. “Please correct me if I’m wrong?” 
To the Heart [?]
“All this sounds good to me, but I need to go, my foot needs salve,” Tomrin said, kicking back his chair to put on his boots. 
“I thought you two were serious,” one of the miserly men said.
Tomrin flushed with irritation. He had months’ worth of pay in his pocket. He didn’t need the man’s money. He didn’t need a salary. “I am serious about glass. If you—” Tomrin stomped on a boot. “—want to put money in, that’s up to Robles. I master the glass, he masters everything else.” In the ensuing silence at the table, Tomrin pulled in the other boot, sucking air as his foot cried out in pain. 
“Is that even legal?” Nuttel asked. 
“I don’t see why not,” Marten offered. “We all heard him. Words spoken are just as good as written when witnessed by so many.” 
Tomrin stood up. “There you go.” He picked up his tarsk, drained it and set the glass back down. Affecting a poor bow, he offered them all a goodnight before heading for the entrance to the merchant tent. He hobbled in pain and went slow from it—and the tarsk. 
Robles caught him at the entrance. “They are going to want control.” 
“I trust you,” Tomrin said, “Whatever you think is right, you know I’ll be happy with it. You’re the Pack Leader. As long as I’m still the kingbird of the glass I’m good with anything.” 
“I can’t believe you are leaving me with these wolves,” Robles said. 
“My foot, man.” 
“It’s not that bad.” 
“It’s not your foot,” Tomrin said. “When I meet with Rennly will I only be hobbling?” 
“Rennly’s not important. He’s a clown in a black dress.” 
“But he’s my clown in a black dress and he’s trying to kill me.”
“That’s fair, but…”
Marten walked over, behind Robles. “I need a quick word with, Master Ocrin.” The Orish man said to Robles. 
“All yours, counselor,” Robles replied, visibly irritated. “I am just going to do what I think is right.” He turned and headed back to the overpopulated table. 
“What is it, Counselor Marten? Everything is fine,” Tomrin said; it wasn’t a question. The man was worried for him, shadowing him like this. 
“Lady Margretta wanted me to remind you—tell you--she forgot to tell you. Whatever you do, don’t drink any from the Wellspring. She needs to train you first.” 
“I know that,” Tomrin said, just as quietly as the man whose voice had turned to a whisper. “I’m not a fool.” 
“She’s worried… Yith the stress you’re under you might do something. You know?” Marten sounded embarrassed. “Sometimes the stress makes it easier to reach the Dark Halcyon, to feel the pull. Sometimes the Pond will sing. Just ignore it. It’s a lie.” 
“I know,” Tomrin said. “Why don’t you let her know warning comes a little late. I’ve already heard and ignored the Luster many of times before. I’m not an unread peasant,” he added. “And you need not follow me.” 
“Of course not. Good. Good,” Marten said. “I’ll let you go. If anyone asks, I was just letting you know your legal obligation still holds with your friend negotiating on your behalf.” 
“Yes, fine,” Tomrin said. “One more thing, counselor?”
“Yes?”
“Tell me. Did Lady Margretta tank our deal with the Sapphire Front?”
“If she did, this is the first I am hearing of it.”
Tomrin sighed. “Thank you.”
“And one last thing,” Marten said.
“My half brother, Rennly?”
Marten nodded. “He is your enemy. And wants you dead.”
“I know,” Tomrin said.
With the grace unusual to men his size, he turned and left Tomrin standing in the way of a new couple as they stumbled into the Castle tent from the Merchant Quarter. Tomrin stepped awkwardly around them as the man remarked on the quality of gentlemen these days, not even holding the door.
Chapter 20: The Edge of the World
	We are inside someone else’s nothing.
		—Head Astronomer Eldon Main, personal notes, circa 326 AC.

Tomrin registered no surprise at flying.
He’d flown above the streets of Woolad so many times before and every time he felt the same exhilaration, the same sense of limitless freedom. At times he flew only five, ten, or fifteen feet above the ground. Now he flew high above his childhood home where he’d been born. This high above the carpentry shop he could see all of Woolad below. Flight was effortless for him, this being who he was; this bird free of all but the highest grandeur!
He soared and the earth spread out before him as Woolad shrunk from view. The world grew blue and green, rich and lush with color and life. The sun shined red, a ruby hanging in the sky. Tomrin thought nothing of it. It gave off no heat, only light…as it should. The cool air did not stir as he rose higher. Mountains shrank, oceans grew, and great clouds of white like the bloom of cottonwood trees soon hid the solid earth from view. Still higher he flew. 
He was at the edge of something. Something great. Like he was flying to a great new revelation. It was as if chance had merged with destiny, and his destiny had gone from good to great, to grand. He turned to look to see where he was flying and recoiled at what he saw. 
The Vast Space
The space ahead was limitless in size, and countless worlds stretched from next door out in all directions.
For as grand as he had felt moments before, Tomrin saw he was nothing now. A great vast alien space loomed in front of him and it, a great, yawning dark abyss. A mindless terror seized him, as the void starred into him with countless glittering eyes. There were worlds upon worlds; stars upon stars—and a great void between, the size and scope defying his imagination. To look was to be lost; to see was to invite blindness, death, destruction. Madness!
In panic he clawed his way back. He awoke, shocked at his fear, surprised to find himself in his sisters’ tent as the dream faded. Of course, he couldn’t fly. At least that part was a shame. He slipped back to sleep, disappointed—the same as always after a flight dream. That and a touch of unease. 
When he woke, it was morning and too hot to roll over on the cot and fall back asleep. He sat up and put his feet on the ground and groaned. His body hurt, but his foot was a fat puffy wad of pain. The color had only deepened. The purple and yellow made it look sick. 
He swore several muttered curses through gritted teeth as he pulled on his pants and put on his boots. “This is feathered ridiculous!” 
No amount of gold was worth this. I need a new line of work, he thought as he left the tent to enter the stirring glare of a Woolad spring morning. But he knew he was being ridiculous. He was a glass man and nothing was going to change that.
High Summer [?]
The day cooked like summer.
A crystalline, morning-blue sky filled the overhead. Not a single cloud. Even the air between the tents was thin. Tomrin walked, avoiding the paths and the people on them. They were laughing and calling to each other. Tomrin had no desire for revelry—not when he was still rubbing sleep from his eyes and they were the ones who woke him.
He limped to his father’s tent. His mother was inside. She was busy putting away the furniture for travel. “Your father’s at the fair,” she told him. “You’ll have to get your breakfast there,” she added as she tucked away a skein of thread. She was saving her sewing to pack last. 
Tomrin headed to the fairgrounds. He needed to find his father, or Robles, or even Marten. As a soldier, Tomrin figured the man had to know something about staves. But definitely his father. I need to train up quickly. He didn’t need Marten’s words of warning to spur him on. Even with a bad foot, he could waste no time. Rennly might use it to train himself. That would be just like him: a feathered menace.
No Help [?]
Tomrin rubbed his chest liberally. No one would think it strange but he glanced around all the same.
Emy walked up the path. She wore what looked like the same white robe as yesterday. He pulled his hand away from his chest, idly adjusted his shirt.
“It’s almost time for me to sing my song.” Emy said. “You are going to go listen right?” 
“I don’t know,” Tomrin said, 
“Oh, you have to!” 
“Well, since you are my favorite sister—” 
“I’m your only sister!” Emy squawked. 
Tomrin touched her little nose with his finger. “Boop. You are correct, but still my favorite.” Tomrin wondered where her friend, the Orioles ox of a girl, was but didn’t ask. 
When they reached the gorge with the stage and a high pavilion raised over it to protect the singers from the sun, no act was singing. A censor had taken the stage. The crowd was not happy. The Orish grumbled the hardest. “What happened?” Tomrin asked, but the censor shouted for quiet. 
“Quiet!” the black suited Orioles man called out. “Everyone quiet down or those blaspheming scoundrels won’t be the only ones arrested!” 
The crowd quieted to a low grumble. Tomrin and Emy stood near the top of the knoll. Tomrin saw where the censor pointed. Ten or more censors with an equal number of Orioles men stood with four Orish boys in custody. Near the foot of the stage. The Orish boys were dressed up in women’s clothing. Part of their act? Tomrin wondered. From the distance Tomrin couldn’t be certain if these Orioles men he’d seen before. Two of the slavers looked like the ones at Master Laz’s the night he’d died. The censor on the far left, maybe could have come from the Winged Helm Inn. 
“They are from Zircos,” Tomrin whispered to Emy. She shushed him with a look. The censor did want quiet. 
The man on the stage continued, raising his voice to a bellow, clearly irritated that he didn’t get his quiet, only a simraculun of it as others whispered and talked in low voices against his will. “It is against the law to harbour slaves in Corundum as well as Zircos. When we find you, and you know who you are, the punishment is lashes—one hundred lashes. So if you harbor a slave stop, turn them over tonight, one night only and you will be free of punishment. I see evil amongst you people! Evil men, Marked men. You harbor them as well, and the punishment will be worse. The gods do not take kindly to disobedience. Perhaps it is your husband, or son? Turn them in. If they are found and you are found to know, the punishment is death! And your soul will forever be cast into the Lake of Fire!” 
“A hundred lashes,” Emy whispered. “So many.” 
“Uh, yes,” Tomrin said. He wasn’t thinking about the punishment for harbouring slaves. He kept his eyes on the censor, afraid the fear would betray him. 
He could trust no one. Not the four boys the censors were making an example of. Not his family. Not strangers. Not even Robles, but he wasn’t here. Nothing has changed, Tomrin told himself. This was the danger he lived with. Slowly, he rubbed his chest with the back of his left thumb. The scales, like those of a fish, were growing back. Soon he’d have to burn them off.
Perfect Exasperation [?]
The loud censor left the stage and he and his cohort marched the four culprits off up the knoll and past Tomrin. 
These boys were clearly nobodies and there women and two men followed begging the censors for justice and mercy, swearing that their boys weren’t runaway slaves. They had the papers. 
“Runaway would avoid notice, not enter a competition,” Tomrin said, loud enough for the censors from the stage to hear. The closest one was only a few yards away. 
The front man halted the procession. “Who said that?” The man demanded to know. “Who here thinks they knew what runaway slaves would do?” He was a whip of a man skinnier than Rennly but as tall. He had a razor-sharp face and his eyes like a razor slid over Tomrin. Fool. Tomrin wasn’t sure how he meant the man or himself for opening his mouth. He worried Emy might implicate him, but she stood strangely quiet. 
“Yes, if they are runaway slaves why risk putting on a show?” One of the two Orishmen asked, taking up the argument. 
Clearly annoyed, the censor restarted the procession. He wasn’t going to find his man and the argument wasn’t making him look wise, or judicious. The crowd seemed more than ready now to turn on at least the slavers. Armed with Tomrin’s words the Orish men were making the black suited man look petty and small for picking on boys, dressed in ladies’ clothes. 
“Are you out of your mind?” Emy asked when the men had tracked down the others from the knoll. 
“I was wondering the same thing,” Tomrin replied.
A Real Glow [?]
“I thought it was brave to say something,” a voice behind him said.
Tomrin had heard it before. And the glow of it made him forget his Mark. It belonged to the girl Elisah, the judge’s clerk and daughter. She was with her father, Judge Reydal. He did not wear his red judge gown but the simple gray brown suit with a small black cravat tied around his throat. It looked hot and suffocating but he seemed fine with the heat. Elisah no longer wore her gray dress of wool, but a blue dress with a high neck, laced at the junction of her chin. Her hair was coiffed without a brown strand out of place. 
“What are you doing here?” Tomrin asked her. 
Elisah smiled at him and answered his artlessly posed question. “I’m going to sing.” 
“Me too.” Emy said. Tomrin had forgotten for a second that his sister was with him. 
The judge eyed them both. “Tomrin Ocrin. And you must be his wife? No sister?” He extended his hand to Emy. “Judge Reydal, and this is my daughter Elisah.” 
“I’m Emy.” They shook hands.
Elisah held her own out to Tomrin. Her fingers were long and slender. He stared at them a split second before taking them. She shook, he just held on. 
“It’s really great that you are working to keep the glass shop in Menad,” Eliash said. “From the sounds of it Godly Glassworks will be pumping new money into the community again soon.” 
“And it’s a shame about your old master,” Judge Reydal added as he took Tomrim’s hand and shook. 
“It’s so sad,” Elisah said, touching his arm. “I’m sorry for your loss. Master Lazoloth seemed like a father to you.”
“Yes,” Tomrin said, feeling mixed. In a way she was right about Master Laz even if he never really thought of him like that. He was like his fathers in many ways. Now he was dead, and Tomrin felt more for him, felt closer because he too had been born with the Leviathan’s Mark.
Eliash removed her hand.
Like the Birds [?]
The master of ceremonies climbed tentatively to the stage, taking each step like a man well chastened.
He announced the next act by reading it woodenly from his program. The man he called climbed to the stage and sang his song while the master of ceremonies waited on the wing watching, listening as if expecting to have to cut him off.
It was awkward for Tomrin standing next to the judge and his daughter.
He could not focus on the machinations on the stage, not until Emy’s name was called and Elisah headed up through the crowd to be closer when it was her turn. Emy’s song was sadly as forgettable as the others, and Tomrin wondered when the competition would get over. The sun was tracking high in the sky, and beat down on his head and shoulders. After her song Emy headed into the crowd to her large friend. Finally, the master of ceremonies called Elisah Reydal’s name from the list.
“I wanted a boy,” Judge Reydal said, almost as if to himself as his daughter climbed up the wooden steps of the stage. She began to sing and the crowd fell quiet. She sang and the crowd applauded when she hit high notes. Tomrin or the Judge, both just listened as Elisah’s voice soared to unspoken heights. The words were a language Tomrin didn’t know, but it sounded like High Silvan. It was as if she were one of the high sprites. When she finished, Tomrin had no doubt that she had won and he clapped with everyone else.
“She’s amazing,” he said, thinking he’d heard the song before. 
“I wouldn’t give her up for anything,” the judge said. He turned to Tomrin and Tomrin saw a tear in the man’s right eye. “It’s funny how the gods work,” the man said, before wiping the tear. 
“Yes,” Tomrin agreed. “Funny.” He glanced around for the censors, remembering Elisah’s song. “Wasn’t that Shelia’s Aria?” 
The judge must have caught Tomrin, meaning. “It’s not banned, and these Zircos censors are just roving bandits. They each think they are destined to catch the Lightshy Crow himself, when they are just thugs,” the man said. “They will move on.”
Tomrin hoped the man was right.
To Bob [?] 
Tomrin was thankful away from under the man’s measuring gaze.
It had turned into a struggle to look at him. He wasn’t sure what the man was really driving at. Only for a moment Tomrin allowed himself to fantasize. A more lovely wife he could hardly imagine. “Us and the glass shop,” Tomrin said, as if adding something.
The master of ceremonies called out Robles’ name but he didn’t arrive. After a quick consultation by the judges on the first row in chairs, the winners were announced. The judge headed down to congratulate his daughter. 
His sister hadn’t won but now chatted contentedly with her friend.
Tomrin left her chatting, and went searching for a barber.
A Hair Cut [?]
The young Rubish barber called him by name and was friendly.
Tomrin, however, found the man’s attempt at conversation awkward. He paid the man for his haircut and shave and a small something for his efforts, happy to be away from the infernal talk of weather or the troubles brewing between Zircos and Corundum, other straight nonsense Tomrin hadn’t wanted to follow but could. So much better if I only knew High Silvan.
Sheep Shearing Days largely over, the campgrounds had cleared out by the time his hair was cut, and Tomrin tramped—his limp only hurting when he jostled it wrong—straight to the Ocrin wagon. 
The tents were down and Tomrin’s father was folding the smaller tent Emy’s
Dable made a question noise like clearing his throat. “You certainly don’t look like a hayseed, now. Go find your sister. We’re ready to leave.”
Heading Out [?]
The oxen, two tired looking beasts, Sally and Milly, were already hitched to the wagon.
Everything but the last tent was loaded.
Tomrin hurried back to the hillock and small gorge with the stage for Emy. Most everyone had cleared out but he found Emy with her friend talking to three boys. One was still in his ladies dress. The Orish boy was checking out the big girl Kam. Love, he sighed. So young and so foolish. 
“Emy,” Tomrin said, interrupting their meeting. “Mom and Dad are leaving.” 
“Already?” Emy said. “Feels like we just got here.” Emy was older than he was when Sheep Shearing Days had lost any meaning to him and Tomrin envied her spirit, her zest. 
“I know,” he said, lying. “Feels like only a single day.” 
Emy said her goodbyes and Tomrin said, then finally she consented to be dragged away. “I think she’s in love,” Emy said when they reached the top of the hill. Tomrin just grunted, and without hearing, Emy began listing all the reasons for her suspicion. 
For himself, Tomrin wondered if a boy like him could find the love of a young woman—one with a voice to make grown men cry. “What do you think of the singer who won?” he asked during one of Emy’s precious breaths. 
“Oh, she, Elly? Whatever her name—she is so lovely. I couldn’t believe how beautiful she was, and her voice. I could listen to her all day. She knew who you were.” Emy stopped. “No,” she said, putting a hand on his arm. “You aren’t in love with her are you, Tomrin?” 
“I think I’d know if I was,” Tomrin said, not lying but skimming truth from his words like cream from cold milk. “When I say she was the best. You were second. I didn’t want you getting mad.”   
“Yes, I was robbed.” Emy said, light and airy, tossing her hands in the air.
They continued on to the wagon. Soon Tomrin was riding with his father into the lower steppes. The conversation turned from the only interesting topic of the deal struck the previous night and everyone fell silent as the sun set.
“It feels like we are at the edge of the world,” Tomrin said of the plains stretching into the twilight. 
“I better walk,” Dable said. “I want you to drive the team as hard as you can. We’ll reach your brothers in a couple hours. It will be too late tonight. And next week...your rematch with Rennly. I wish I could be there.”
Tomrin yawned. He didn’t.
Chapter 21: The Lower Steppes
	When you are in the middle of nowhere, it’s best to keep going.
		—An old Peregrine proverb

They raced away from Woolad as fast as the oxen could go—which was a slow plod at best, one which Tomrin’s parents and sister could easily match on foot. 
Tomrin held the reins, but the oxen knew the way. The one on the left was Sally, the one on the right was Milly. They had the plod of slow beasts overworked and underfed, both tired and old. The wagon’s wheels groaned against the sandy path which was the Eastern Highway. Low and off to the left the moon, Serathus, hung low and waxed gibbous. 
On the road, the Ocrin family was not the only one retiring back to their wandering lives on the steppes. Others raced home with them. All but Tomrin wore pilgrims white as was their way. Tomrin had been one of them once—for a short time, but now this land and its people seemed alien to him. Looking for a feather. So many of them, a train of them and so few feathers. They were all wasting their lives on a doomed quest. 
In the darkness, white stars blanketed a strip in the sky. They and Serathus were the only light and the rolling plains appeared dead, a place where life had fled. The gray land stretched right up to the dome of the sky. Tomrin remembered the final moments of his dream from the night before, that strange smallness, the insignificance, as if he were already dead.
Woolad had the feeling of chaos and darkness, but out here light only shone at all to tantalize and to tease, and to further darken the land with shadows. The air was dry and cooling after a day of baking in the sun. They were entering the heart of superstition and ignorance. And it was a vast heart—the death it offered: eternal.
Only a few days, Tomrin reminded himself; he would return to Menad, and he would defeat Rennly. Only a few days of training then he could leave this arid land. 
His father had let him know nothing had changed with Rennly. Tomrin had only a week to prepare and to square off again. He had to be ready; he had to take Rennly by storm. Had to crush him. Then I can go back to glass. 
“What are you thinking about?” Emy asked him from the driver’s side. Their parents had fallen to the back of the wagon. This was a hard life and Tomrin would not wish it on his enemies. Maybe Rennly or Fredick. 
“Rennly,” Tomrin replied. “I don’t understand him. It’s like he can’t grow up.. The judge said the censors today just want to be the one to catch a Marked Man.” Using the judge’s idea made saying it easier. “But Rennly, I don’t know. He’s different, cracked like untempered glass.” 
“You know his secret?” Emy asked in a whisper. 
“Yes. Still doesn’t explain it. So he’s envious of me. I swear I don’t get it.” 
“I don’t know either,” Emy said, and offered nothing further than a yawn.
What’s in the Head [?]
A quiet solemnity ruled for a time. 
Side roads, just wide enough for wagons, trickled out of the Eastern Highway, and the train thinned as wagon after wagon left the main road for south or north into the steppes. In time the stars and Serathus shifted in the sky. 
Dable spoke. “Turn here,” he said. “Actually, hop down. I’ll drive the team.” Tomrin laid the leather reins across the front board of the wagon and stood up. Grabbing the handle he eased himself down. “And don’t favor your foot. It will just make it worse,” his father added.
“I know,” Tomrin said. “It’s just stiff, and hurts.” 
Dable mounted the wagon and sat in the driver seat before taking up the reins. “A little pain never hurt anyone. I wish a sore foot was the only pain I had now.” Tomrin’s old man’s shoulders were shot from all the years running a saw and hammer, and he’d hurt his knee out on the steppes some years ago. The joint never quite healed right and his gate had a sight list to it ever since. He swung the reins and Callice and Frita plodded forward. After a minute Dable added: “We’re almost here.”   
Tomrin hoped so. He was growing tired of this trek, his foot hurt, and he was growing weary of being reminded why he didn’t like spending time with his family. Tomrin swore his father was driving longer than anyone before turning as punishment for not competing for second or third place at the fair. I won best in show.
As Janet and Emy prayed, Tomrin limped on in a sullen silence. Every hour they spent traveling, and not sleeping or training, were wasted hours.
Hadras [?]
Temporary paddocks held goats, a few sheep, and a handful of oxen and cows. “Hadras!” Dable called out loudly. “The ribbon winners are here!” 
“Tomrin! My brother!” Hadras said as he exited his tent. They shook hands, Hardas’ grip was a vice crushing bone. 
“Careful!” Tomrin said, pulling away. “I need those fingers. But it’s good to see you, Hadras.”
His half brother wore his hair off to the side in some strange style. Being a pilgrim wasn’t what he wanted to do but he and Dable and Tomrin set up the tents. It didn’t escape Tomrin that Hadras did most of the work. He ran the staking hammer, but it was Dable who directed the work when needed, his words a chafe on Hadras and he knew it. He measured them out, letting Hadras work as hard as he wanted in the moonlight. Hadras with his odd hair was like a stallion, one that had not quite been broken. He still required a delicate touch.
When finally Tomrin lay on his old bed in his old tent, he felt the night had disappeared as if he’d been in a fugue. I still need to warn Hadras about Rennly. It was strange how knowledge was mixed with the feeling of the canvas on his hands and in his fingertips. He closed his eyes and morning came. 
Tomrin’s father woke him and a dream faded as he opened his eyes. 
“It’s time to get up.” Dable said, “We’re moving out.” His father started pulling up the tent stakes of his tent. 
“Going?” Tomrin asked as he rubbed his eyes, they itched, irritated like him at being woken up. “I need to practice staves. That’s the only reason I’m out here.” 
“You’ll practice on the way,” Dable replied and pulled up another stake. “We need to get going. Get up and start helping.” Dable batted the tent. 
“I am getting up,” Tomrin snapped back at him. 
“Good,” Dable said and Tomrin heard the stake clutter to the ground. Clanch. “And your tent is your responsibility.”
Tomrin pulled on pants feeling irritated yet somewhat assuaged by his forward thinking. He had kept his shirt on, and now with the tent’s integrity breached he decided not to change it, wrinkled and sweaty though it was. He left his tent tired and annoyed at being woken up so rudely. He grumbled his good morning to his brother, sister, and mother. They were fast at work tearing down the camp while the animals stirred about, bleating their disapproval. They knew they would soon be driven from their paddocks.
“Dable,” Hadras muttered out of their father’s earshot. “I swear.” 
Tomrin could hardly fault him.
On the Way [?]
Hadras pulled the drawstrings of Tomrin’s tent, the last to be rolled and pushed into a canvas sleeve.
Tomrin’s brother had already carried their father’s tent all by himself, now he carried Tomrin’s smaller tent to the wagon and set it in.
“Thanks, Hadras,” Tomrin said, but Hadras just grumbled; he was in a mood. 
“You should wear the white with us,” Emy said as they stopped and ate a quick bite of dried berries and flat bread. She had been chatting away with their mother about who she hoped to meet as they headed deeper into the steppes.   
“Can’t you just be quiet for once in a life?” Hadras asked. He plopped down the last of his bread and stomped, off his mane of hair flopping as he headed for the paddock. 
“He’s such a pig,” Emy said.
“Don’t be mean,” Janet Ocrin berated her. “He can’t help it; you can.” It seemed a double standard to Tomrin, but managing Hadras’ moods had always been a problem. Tomrin had heard some say it was him who burnt the Ocrin Carpentry shop to the ground, not Rennly’s father, and not just Rennly that said that. Tomrin didn’t believe any of it. As far as he was concerned he had caught Master Richot in the act. “Tomorrow, I’ll wear the whites for you, Emy,” Tomrin said, standing. He walked over to Hadras and helped him tear the last of the paddock down. 
Dable limped over and handed Tomrin a shepherd’s staff. 
“How am I to practice with this?” 
“Not with this, and at midday, when the sun is high,” Dable said. “And stop favoring your foot.” 
He limped away, favoring his own.
A Taste of Dust [?]
Soon the family and animals were underway, with Hadras driving everyone to hurry as if he were in charge of the family, not Dable. The oxen pulled the wagons all hatched together in a train. Dable rode in front and Emy and Janet behind in the others. Not needing any help, Hadras led the goats behind him and drove the sheep ahead of him. Tomrin found himself using his staff more as a walking stick than for what it was designed for.
The hot morning sun grew hotter, higher in the sky. The sere land rolled and the goats and sheep killed any green they found in their way, eating and chewing their way forward. Rocks baked in the sun and Tomrin shaded his eyes against the glare in the sky in front of them and over the rocky soil. The Lower Steppes had always been dry, but this was the worst he’d ever seen. 
To New Cold Well Springs [?]
“What the feathers are you doing out here, Tomrin Ocrin?” he asked himself the next day as the sun ascended towards its zenith. “You are no shephard, even dressed in white.”
He’d wasted most of the previous day. Robles could have helped him as much, probably more. Today Hadras drove one of the wagons: Emy’s. She walked with Tomrin as he helped her drive the animals on. As Hadras insisted that today he drive the wagon. No one thought to argue. 
“This isn’t very fun,” Emy admitted to him, rejoining him with one other sheep. 
“No. It has me wondering,” Tomrin said, “Why am I even doing any of it.”
Emy set down the wayward lamb. “What do you mean?” Emy asked. She made no secret that she was unhappy: the New Cold Wellsprings, where they were headed, was likely to be deserted by everyone, even other Pilgrims.
“Why train? Why bother with any of that?” Tomrin said. “Godly Glassworks is hardly the only glass shop in the world. I could go to the capital. In Corundum I would make three or four times as much as I do in Menad. I’m being silly, wanting to stay in Menad.” 
“Oh, don’t go to Corundum!” Emy said. “You would be so far away then.” 
“From this?” Tomrin said, “I want to get as far away from this as possible. That’s why I left. Can’t you see it? All this searching for a feather is silly. Lightning striking the sea in the same spot twice is more likely. You’re wasting your life out here. I can feel mine dripping away.” 
Emy stopped. “You sound like you hate the gods,” she said.   
“I don’t hate them.” Tomrin turned to stare at where New Cold Well Springs should have already appeared. Mirages, the silvery blue spirits which haunted the hot days of the Lower Steppes, lay ahead.
Cold Well Springs [?]
Finally the old well of the Cold Well Springs resolved from the mirages, looking from before the Cracking of the World Egg—at least some said that the Cracking was why the stonewell had run dry. The stone blocks were pitted from age and were gray like those found in Menad and Woolad and the surrounding areas. Rotting planks of wood covered the top, the lip of the well the perfect height for a toddler, or sheep or goat, or even ox to trip and fall in. 
Tormin and Emy followed the wagons, careful to not let any of the willful beasts in their charge head for the old cistern. It still smelled of water. It was said that the dead who fell in still haunted the well—the old and the new.
New Cold Springs [?]
Water ran clear from the moss covered rocks around the new spring. And while two wide-trunked Myrrh shrubs now grew near the old well—those around the new well had long since drowned and fell to decay. 
This was life in the Lower Steppes, and Tomrin couldn’t believe his family still clung to their beliefs that the gods cared at all. He glanced around at them, lost in thought. He thought back to something Margretta had said. Who are you, Tomrin Ocrin? Who was he and what was he doing here? I am the kingbird of glass, he told himself. But that felt empty. 
When, after they watered and fed the animals, and after they watered and fed themselves, Tomrin announced that he was leaving in the morning. “What about your training,” Dable said. 
“I don’t need to be a master at staves, just good enough to beat Rennly.” 
“Sounds like you are going off half-baked again,” Dable said. “You still have a whole day to train, then another to reach Menad.”   
“It’s all coming back to me,” Tomrin said, “Not just the staves, but why I left all this in the first place. This land is a waste. Feathers or no feathers. Can’t you see the gods are liars? Living in Menad has opened my eyes. If they want their feathers back so bad, why not let them find them?” 
“Talk like that,” Dable said. “It’s a good thing your mother doesn’t hear it.”
“So? You don’t believe either,” Tomrin said. “Aren’t you just humoring my mother?”
“You don’t understand sacrifice.” Dable stomped off to his tent and left Tomrin standing in front of his own.
Knife Hunting [?]
Tomrin walked over to his brother’s tent. “Hadras, I need to borrow a knife.” 
“What for?” Hadras asked from inside his tent. “Not going to hurt anyone, are you?”
“Not unless it’s Rennly.”
“What?”
“I angered Dad too,” Tomrin ticked off. “But no.” His brother’s question only cemented his irritation at being out here. “Not hurting anyone but myself.”
The tent stirred with Hadras’ shadow. The flap opened and Hadras handed him his bone handled knife. “Don’t do that either,” he said.
Tormin took the handle and sheath. “If I die and Rennly is still alive, just watch out. He might be coming for you.”
Hadras spied the air and horizon suspiciously. “Thanks.”
Tomrin turned, and in case Hadras called after him still wanting to know what he had in mind, he worked up a lie. Cut my finger nails. But Hadras didn’t ask. The sun was setting and Tomrin headed for his tent. I don’t understand sacrifice?
The animals were bedding down in their paddocks, safe from the coyotes and cats. It wasn’t exactly safe to be out alone on the steppes at night. Or so it was said. Tomrin felt it was just one more superstition, even if the animal tracks lead to the springs. Out here it seemed every nonsense story about bloodbeasts and men-eating, half-man half-beast, could be true. I really need to get out of here. He was starting to see how his parents could come to believe such nonsense in the stark moonlight.
The Spook in the Night [?]
Inside his own tent, Tomrin tossed the knife on his bed and retied the flaps. 
He lit a match. The acrid aroma of the match head burning filled his nostrils and tent as he lit his floor lamp. Dropping the match on the ground, he snuffed it as with his boot, grinding its smoking ember into the dry dirt. Then with Hadras’ knife in hand he sat down on his bed. The the curved thing looked sharp. 
Tomrin sat staring at the knife’s curved blade. It was still too early to make the cut. The mass of evil in him, so large now, was ready to escape his chest. He pulled out some small clothes and tossed them on the knife. He moved around in his tent as if in a dream. He crouched to the ground. He didn’t want to do this here. You should have left last night. Now he had no choice. He had neither good flames, nor glass rods to heat. 
Cutting was so much worse. He’d still have to cauterize the wound or it would bleed and bleed. Even then it would still bleed some before he could cauterize it. 
Tomrin knelt down near the lamp. Its flame would have to serve to heat the knife. He began to dig lightly into the dirt. His blood all over the ground? Better to bury it. The soil was pebbles and sand and dirt and a few roots and streamers sent out by the leathery weeds and grass. Even this close to the springs the steppes grass was sparse and water starved this year.
Tormin waited before the lamp, then moved to his bed and waited again.
He tested the knife’s edge against his finger nail letting the blade catch against the thumb of his left hand.
Hadras kept the thing sharp. 
Confusion [?]
Tomrin set down the knife and kicked the mound of dirt into the hole, and laid down without cutting the scales from his chest.
He still had time. He could train all tomorrow. The Ocrin wagons were here now. They were not going anywhere soon; his family had their lives to find a Serath’s feather.
Tomrin thought back, remembering a moment from his childhood. Rennly had stopped him on the street below the temple. He wanted to fight but Tomrin had run instead. Tomrin wondered if all this was Rennly trying to have his fight? If that fight had happened then, would any of this be happening now? Why can’t he just let it go?
At some point Tormin fell asleep.
“If you are going, it’s time to get going.” Dables voice woke the skittering sleep he had entered after waking him in the morning. “Tear down your tent.” 
“I didn’t sleep.”
Dable batted the side of the canvas tent. “If you are staying, you have to pray. Now get up.” He continued to rap the tent. Bwap. Bwap. Bwap.
“Feathers,” Tomrin swore under his breath. He had no desire to pray. “Fine. Give me a minute.”
Dable gave the tent another good paw. Bwap. “Good.”
Incision [?]
The air seemed cool for the moment, but that would change as the milky sky turned a sapphire blue. The suffocating heat would bring mirages and illusions, phantoms of the mind to the steppes.
Tomrin said not a word at prayers and after breakfast, dried blueberries, Tomrin and Dable set about to practice. Tomrin picked up his practice staff, and followed Dable out beyond the gurgling water of the spring. Dable used the lighter staff to etch a circle in the rocky soil. Tomrin dropped the butt of his staff on the ground and held it with his right hand and waited. 
“You look like you know how to use that thing, standing like that, my brother,” Hadras said standing over him. Tomrin couldn’t understand why his brother would address him like that. Yes, they were step-brothers but it made no sense not to use his name. 
“When I beat the feathers out of Rennly, I’ll be the kingbird of more than glass,” Tomrin said, hefting his staff with both hands and swinging it down like a hammer, mace or scepter. Incompletely carved as it was, it still had the feel of a staff, but definitely no good in a fight. 
Dable finished the circle. “Perfect, yet again,” he announced of the ring drawn on the ground, even though as Tomrin stepped inside he could see his father had slightly corrected the final few feet to make the circle meet. “Now?” Dable asked Tomrin. 
“You go on the defense.” 
“Will Rennly be on the defense?” 
“He will be when I slam him,” Tomrin replied. “I’m done...” He didn’t wait for his father or to say more himself, but advanced swinging.
Dable swatted him after making an easy block.
Training [?]
Tomrin’s attack had no finesse and Dable let him know as he rubbed his arm.
“You will have to do better than that if you want to put Rennly on the defensive.” 
They settled in to spar. After Dable tired, Hadras took his place, and Dable yelled at the both of them. No, Tomrin! Hadras, you wool head. Keep your staff up. Keep your head in it. Patience. Work him, work him! Don’t look there. Just go! Hold that stick. Step. Step. Step! You have to take a feathered step! 
Dable hobled into the ring breaking up the clack, clack, clack, of their staves. “You are slower than a feathered goat,” he said, taking his staff back from Hadras. 
“So?” Hadras asked. “I’m faster than you.” 
Hadras wander off, towards the tents and the fresh water. His brother had the right idea, but instead of following him to the cool of a myrrh shrub Tomrin and his father continued to spar. 
“You could be a grand champion in Corundum, the way you were able to win the yellow ribbon,” Dable said when they both tired. 
“I don’t care about ribbons or staves.” Tomrin said. “I just need to beat Rennly. That only once. Then I can watch him, keep him from poisoning my drink.”
“You really hate him, don’t you?” Dable said.
Tomrin shook his head. “Not me, Papa, not me.”
Time [?]
Back in camp they all played pincushion until the stars came out, all but Hadras who brooded in his tent and had not come out—not even for super. 
When Tomrin begged off another game he went back to his tent. He lit the floor lamp and redug the hole. He waited until he was happy no one was going to interrupt him. The mass was ready to push out of him and be visible to all—or only Daughters? 
He didn’t want to find out the hard way. He pulled off his robe and took the knife from the bed. Kneeling down in front of the lamp, he cut the glinting scales from his chest.
In the morning he would head back to Menad and catch Rennly off guard.
Chapter 22: The Old Dead Well
	And in a darkness as black as holes in space, will he still know our names?
		—A Translation from the Sixth Age

Tomrin dropped the blood soaked smallclothes into the small pit. Sweat coated his body and gave him a chill as he heated the blade of Hadras’ knife in the lamp’s flame. Blood from his chest streamed into his left hand cupped under the wound. The red marble dripped through his fingers into the pit at his knees and splattered over the removed scales.
Gritting his teeth against the heat of the point, Tomrin touched the knife to the wound. The pain of touching hot steel to raw flesh drove breath from his lungs. The smell of blood boiling the air and Tomrin’s nostrils as he breathed in. “Feathers,” he swore as he pulled away the knife.
The flame hadn’t heated the blade hot enough to cauterize the wound. Thrusting the knife back into the flame, the blood of the tip blackened just outside the orange of the flame. The blood from his wound continued to gush. The cup of his hand was full with hot slimy red. 
He shifted his weight on his knees and the blood in his hand leaked, splashing down into his clean smallclothes. This had turned into a feathered mess. Gently rocking the knife in the flame, he kept it in the hottest part. The charcoaled blood on the tip turned red hot and began to glow. No waiting this time, Tomrin told himself. The knife needed to be as hot as possible. 
One fluid motion as he arched his wrist to press the tip into the wound, he pulled the blade to his chest. The round hole in his chest was the size of a silver penny and he would have to hit it twice, maybe three times to staunch the flow. The idea made him winch. More blood splashed. His hand was filling more quickly than he remembered it ever had.
He made only a small squeaking knife as he touched the hot knife to his skin.
He pulled the knife from the wound. The triangle of painful burning flesh gushed blood, just like the rest. His blood leaked through his fingers and over the side of the cup he made with his left hand. The stream tickled as it ran down his chest and belly, ruining his small clothes. He was going to have to throw them in the pit as well. 
Disgusted Tomrin dumped his blood out, flunging it with the shallow pit. 
“Feathers,” he muttered. It was only a flesh wound, but the cut bled like it was a puncture. He clapped his hand over his heart to hold in the leakage. Cauterizing his wound wasn’t working. With his hand held awkwardly on his chest, he stood up and dropped the knife. 
Too sharp? He ran through the possibilities in his mind. Or dull? Maybe it was the tarsk, or maybe the sheer size of the wound. The last time he’d cut the Leviathans Mark off the scales were fewer in number and individually smaller. It was like the feathered thing was getting worse as he got older.
He stood for several minutes holding his chest until his arm grew tired. He held it in place with his other then. He waited several minutes but when he took his hands away the wound continued to bleed as before. You need to stop the bleeding. A clot need to form. He set out to make a bandage. He tore a strip from his shirt, getting blood all over it and on his back pack. He held the strip of cloth to the wound, and it seemed to work but it sopped up the blood and dripped out like water. 
He threw the strip into the pit and Tomrin used the whole rest of the ruined shirt. But it too soon sopped through as blood soaked the fibers. So much blood. When blood began to stream from the bundled up shirt he went back to just holding in his blood in with his bare hands. At least that way he was able to reduce the flow to a small dribble. His small clothes were drenched, but he couldn’t worry about that. First he had to stop the bleeding.
Cauterizing the wound hadn’t worked. I made some mistake? He tried it again and failed again. When he stood up he hoped it was the tarsk making him unstable on his feet and weak as well, but tarsk had never done that. It had cut the pain. Now he feared it was making his blood not clot. “At least its gone for the moment,” Tomrin muttered to himself, knowing he was going to have to face the truth. Sitting down on his bed. It, like him, was spattered in blood. Blood was everywhere.
He was certain to be discovered now, just a matter of time. He tried to think but dizziness distracted him, making it hard to focus on anything. Set the tent on fire? But that wouldn’t fix the fact that he was bleeding and no matter what he tried he couldn’t make the bleeding stop. He looked down and realized he had dropped his hand from the wound. Blood drained out of the cut. His heart beat faster and his focus returned. He was going to die if he just sat here. 
“You need help,” Tomrin told himself and forced himself to his feet. His bloody fingers fumbled at the flap strings. Knife. His fingers had gone numb and the slick blood made it hard to work the strings. The knife seemed dead in his hand, but it cut the strings and he dropped it.
It was as revolting as it was alien.
Help [?]
Tomrin rubbed his hands together trying to bring back feeling in them as he ran. 
The wound! The thought brought his hand to the wound. He stumbled but made his way to his father’s and mother’s tent, surprised when he found himself there. 
“Mom. Dad,” he said. “I need your help.” He wasn’t sure if the warbling voice he heard was his, but those were the words he’d wanted to say. Not wanted—but needed. “I’ve cut myself...bad.” 
The groggy sound of his parents waking reached Tomrin through a fog. He couldn’t believe this was happening. “Yes, it’s me,” he replied to his mother’s indistinct question. 
“Dable, put your robe on,” she said. 
Yet it was the fleshy form of Tomrin’s father that appeared by starlight at the flaps of the tent. 
“Uh,” Dable said. “You look like you were attacked by a bear. Show me your wrist.” Dable took Tomrin’s arm and pulled it from his chest. 
“It’s not my wrist,” Tomrin said as his chest drained blood.
“Oh, Tom, dear gods,” Dable said, letting go. “Janet!” The fear in his voice was enough to scare Tomrin back to his senses. He clamped his hand back over the wound. 
Janet Ocrin pushed out of the tent a moment later. Her robe had been tied and hung loosely over her like a small tent. Tomrin flinched when she grabbed him. “Oh, my poor baby. You are covered in blood!” 
Hotter [?]
“Yes,” Tomrin said. And everything was coming apart. His mother’s face seemed to swim in front of him. “Need to close the wound,” he added, weakly. 
“Get Hadras,” Dable said and Janet hurried off. Dable turned to Tomrin. “We can’t have you bleeding all over the tent. Stay here. I need light.” Dable disappeared and Tomrin swayed on his feet. He hadn’t realized his father had been holding him up. He sank to the ground. The fear of death kept his hand in place on his chest. He could barely feel the weak beat of his heart. He looked at his other hand like he’d never seen it before, then turned his head to the sky. His hand was covered in blood but the sky was clear. Piercing light, the stars, throbbed with his heart. They were beautiful, pristine and pure, everything he was not. He wished he could be with them, not here on the ground, dying. He could see now he wasn’t going to meet Rennly and beat him; he was too weak. He let head roll back and he lay down, catching himself with his right hand. He could barely feel the rocks and lumps of dirt pushing into his back. 
He closed his eyes but clung to life and willed himself to sit up when his father commanded it. The floor lamp pulled from the tent was large and Dable had lit it. Made of brass and heavy, it squanted next to a folding chair, sitting bare of any cushion. “In the chair, I need to look at you.” Dable pulled Tomrin up and dumped him into the slatted chair. He held the floor lamp in front of Tomrin. “Pull your hand away.” 
Tomrin slowly complied, confused. His hand was the only thing keeping his blood in. “I don’t—“ he said, losing his train of thought. Tomrin could see from Dable’s green eyes he was in trouble. He racked his brain for all the problems he now had, but couldn’t. He only knew this was serious. Maybe worse than serious. The worst.   
Dable replaced Tomrin’s hand over the wound. “Did you stab yourself in the heart.” 
“No,” Tomrin replied. “Why would I do that?” 
Janet returned and she brought Emy and Hadras with her. Emy hugged Tomrin’s head but Hadras asked the real question. “What do we do?” His mane of hair was a mess on his head. 
“Why did you hurt yourself, Tomrin?” Emy whined. 
“How did he?” Dable asked. “How did you hurt yourself so bad?” 
“Knife,” Tomrin said. “This wasn’t supposed to happen.” He was supposed to cut the scales off, then close the wound with fire. A thought rushed to him. “Such a fool.” He saw how he should have held the fire directly to his wound. That might have worked. 
“My knife?” Hadras demanded. “You did this with my knife?” 
“Yes,” Tomrin said, he saw no point in lying about that. 
“You said you weren’t going to cut anyone.” Hadras said, “That’s my sacrificial knife. It’s covered in bleeding toxin.” 
“That? It’s not the—no.” The bloody knife wasn’t triangular at all. 
“Get it, Hadras,” Dable said. 
Hadras argued with Dable a minute about the location of the knife but with Tomrin’s help they figured it out. Tomrin groaned at the empty cold inside. He wanted to swear at it but didn’t have the strength. 
His mother held his right hard, kneeling. Her muttered prayer to Seasargus came to him in snatches. “Oh my poor baby,” she took to repeating. 
Hadras returned with the knife. “And look at this,” he said, his breathlessness wasn’t only from running. He held the wet small patch of skin and scales for Dable to see. Emy eked at the sight, and a burning shame pushed sweat out the pores on Tomrin’s face. 
“The Infernal Scales of the Leviathan,” Dable said and Janet jumped to her feet letting go of Tomrin’s hand. 
“Oh, the sweet gods,” she said and began to cry and turned away. “The evil. He tried to hide the evil. I can’t believe my baby is... He used to be such a perfect little baby. He never even cried.”
Dable stopped her hysterics. “We need to sew him up. A thread and needle! Quick, woman!” 
Hadras was inspecting the wound holding Tomrin’s hand away. “I don’t think that’s going to work,” he said, letting go, and Tomrin’s hand slapped his own chest. 
“We need a big bandage,” Emy said. 
“Cauterize it,” Tomrin starred. “You have to burn it shut.” 
When Janet returned with the needle and thread, Dable sent her back into the tent for a spoon. “Spoon! Metal!” he shouted to her. Dable handed him the needle and thread to Emy. “We still might need this.” 
With the small silver spoon Janet brought back outside in one hand, Dable turned up the lamp. “Hotter,” Tomrin said. “It has to be red. Hotter.” His mother had turned away. She couldn’t even look at him, but she muttering prayers to Seasargus, as if the god in heaven could help him now. “Hotter!” Tomrin said when Dable pulled it from the flame. 
“It’s as hot as it’s going to feathered get!” Dable said. 
“Oh, sweet Seasargus,” Janet wailed. 
Dable brought the spoon close to Tomrin’s hand. “Move your hand.” 
“No, it has to be hotter.” 
Dable turned his head to Hadras, “Grab his arms.” 
Tomrin removed his hand. And Dable pushed the spoon’s cup against the wound. “Ahh!” Tomrin cried and Dable removed the spoon. “It has to be hotter. Feathers!” The wound still bled but his head cleared. The pain was as bad as when he’d cut the scales off. Dable frowned and put the bloody spoon back in the flame. “Put it in the blue of the flame, it’s the hottest.” 
Soon the spoon began to glow a dull orange. “It’s hot.” Dable said, pulling the spoon from the flame. Tomrin unclamped his hand. The spoon’s black and orange colors filled eyes and vision completely. Dable pushed the hottest part of the spoon into the wound. It was hot but not as hot as Tomrin would have liked it. Not hot enough to deaden the ring of nerves that always grew back. 
Tomrin smelled burning flesh as pain dimmed the lamp. He heard his brother and sister speaking as if they were getting further away as if from inside a deep cavern. “I can’t believe my brother is the Lightshy Crow,” Hadras said. 
“I think we killed him,” added Emy. Then all Tomrin heard was the screech of someone in pain as darkness overtook him, snuffing the stars and the lamp light.
The First Taste [?]
His hands—left first, then right—turned to glass or something like it, something light and brittle. 
Then his feet, both together, were transmuted into that same brittle substance. The sky had turned pure white and the ground was black as coal. It too may have been made of glass or charcoal, or even strewn with black feathers. 
Red birds with triangular like-fox heads patrolled the skies above. Green snakes slithered in and out of the dark earth. Tomrin tried to run but couldn’t. The snakes slid close. The birds swarmed. As they dived Tomrin tried to bat them away with his hands and arms, but his appendages refused to move. His hands and feet stuck fast to something. 
He turned his head and saw a demon staring at him. Its red face scowled and its leather wings hung open. It looked at him with a curious eye, a dark intelligence in them. “Are you the Crow?” it asked in an old man’s voice, creaking and catching, as if it were itself. “I am here for the Crow.” 
“No!” Tomrin shouted and beat his wings against the pinions fettering him to the cross bar of his stand. He arched his head back to yell--and banged it. 
He came awake with a start. 
Slowly he realized he was on his back and the bright lights in his eyes were stars in the cloudless night. The blur made him think of the compound beetle-like scope. Why can’t I perfect it? He wondered. Why wasn’t he the master of the glass he wanted to be? Feathers! As good as he was, he still lacked the knowledge to be truly great.
“He’s awake,” Hadras said.
Tomrin bent his neck to look at his chest. A white bandage of cashmere was wrapped over him. A drop of blood had seeped through. The muttering sound of prayer ceased suddenly. Tomrin tried to move his arm. But they were tied with coarse tent rope. 
Tomrin sat up as his family huddled around him. “Why are my hands tied?” he asked. His legs were tied as well. He felt thirsty, empty and tired as if he had run all day in the heat without food or water. “Untie me.” His chest itched—and the pain. He rubbed it with his bound hand. 
“Don’t do that. You’ll tear it open again,” his father said, grabbing his arms. “Is that what you are trying to do?” 
“No, I’m not trying to tear it. I’m trying to scratch,” Tomrin said. The rope was cutting into his wrists and he couldn’t understand how Dable was afraid he was going to hurt himself—or even had tried to hurt himself. It was nonsense. He had the glass shop to help run. And he needed sleep and then to hurry back to Menad in the morning. “I’m fine, I don’t see why you had to bind me. Was I thrashing in my sleep?” 
“You’ve been cutting the Mark of the Leviathan from your chest,” his mother said. 
Tomrin closed his eyes. Yes, they knew—of course, they did. He saw no point in lying about it anymore, “Yes,” he said. “Don’t tell anyone.” 
“But you have to be Purified,” Emy said. 
“No, I don’t. Master Laz didn’t; he lived for years.” 
“He killed himself,” Dable said. “In the morning, I’m going to Woolad to get the censors. It is death if we don’t.” 
“You don’t have to tell them anything. How would they find out?” Tomrin reefed against his bonds. “I want to live free. I don’t need Purification. The gods are liars. Are you so blind?” Staying had been a mistake; coming had been a mistake. They stared at him blankly. They were a mistake. 
“Tomrin, you are scaring me,” Emy said as Hadras stood and backed away, confused. 
“I’m sorry, Emy,” Tomrin said. “But I will not be bound like an animal for sacrifice.” He stared at her then glanced at others. He could not read their shadow-darkened faces. “Just let me go, forget me, but let me live as I choose.” 
“But the gods—” Janet said. 
“I don’t give one twisted feather for the gods!” Tomrin roared. “If they are so powerful then why let the Leviathan break the Gaze Between the Worlds? Or Crack the World Egg. Tell me that. You can’t, because the Book of Light is lies.” 
Janet Ocrin made the Sign of the Tree. “You were right,” she said to her husband. “It was wise to bind him. The demons have my baby.”
Ropes [?]
Tomrin began untying his feet.
Dable grabbed him by the hair and snatched his arms away. His father still had a frightening power in his tired old body. “The gods will decide your fate,” he said and let go of Tomrin’s hair and grabbed his hands and arms instead. “Hadras get his feet.” 
Tomrin flopped like a dying fish and yelled at them to stop. “Don’t touch me!” 
“Where are we taking him?” Hadras asked as Tomrin yelled at them to let him go but they didn’t listent/ 
“The old dead well,” Dable said. “Get two shepherds crooks,” he added to Emy and their mother. 
“Why not just tie him to a tree!” Emy asked. 
“Obey your father,” Janet Ocrin said. 
Hadras dropped Tomrin’s feet when Tomrin flopped again. Hadras stared at them. “Seems better than the old well,” he said. 
“And do you want to be out here when Serathus sets?” Dable said. “Now grab his feet we need to hurry.” 
A sense of dread pushed the anger from Tomrin. “You don’t have to do this; I’ll be good I promise.” But his father didn’t seem to hear him as he puffed and huffed. He and Hadras half dragged, half carried Tomrin to the old dead well. Tomrin felt dizzy. The spinning and lurching of the sky made him want to heave whatever was left of dinner and the tarsk in his stomach. 
Emy and his mother arrived with the staves. Tomrin swallowed the bile that came into his mouth as Dable and Hadras pushed the rotting cover off the pitted blocks of well stones. The blocks emerged a foot, and appeared a gateway to a dead, forbidden realm of spirits. 
Tomrin wanted to scramble away but he was drained of strength. His muscle refused to work. Cold poured from the hole in the ground next to him. 
“Now, hold still,” Dable said. “Or you’ll come off and do an injury to yourself worse than you’re already done.” Dable and Hadras lifted him up by the shepherds’ staves, one under each arm and swung him over the edge of the well, pushing his legs in. 
Starlight looked up at Tomrin from the shallow water at the bottom.
Inside the Well [?]
His step brother and father lowered him towards the blackness.
Tomrin his feet hit the inch of water on the bottom. He wrenched against the right staff under his arm pulling it with a falling jarring motion, ripping it from Hadras hands. Both Hadras and Dable cursed. Hadras cursed the staff, Dable his son. “You feathered idiot.” 
Tomrin tried to pull the other staff from Dable’s hands, but like his mind, his grip was more sure. Dable jerked on the staff and Tomrin’s chest wound tore open. “Ahh!” he screamed and the staff slipped under his arm and his father pulled it back up. 
“You got your clever side from me,” Dable said. “Once you are Purified, you’ll understand all this has been for your best.” 
“What about the other staff?” Hadras asked. 
“He can’t do anything with it,” Dable said. “Help me close it up.” 
They disappeared and Tomrin checked his wound. The bandage filled with new blood. “Help me,” he said, trying to shout as the cover eclipsed the stars above. “The wound tore open...” The plink of small bits of wood and sand hitting water was louder than him. 
Then there was darkness.
He sunk to the ground and the cold began to leach into him. He tried to grab the staff, to pull it into his lap but strength escaped him. It was useless. Everything was useless now. He sat for what seemed hours as his thirst built. Finally he rolled over and sucked sandy water from the bottom of the old dead well. The cool water tasted of mold and something else—rotting skeletons?
His thirst slaked for the moment, Tomrin tried to untie his feet and ankles but got nowhere. He couldn’t see a feathered thing. He crawled, dragging himself to the side of the well. A lip existed between the blocks. Bbound as he was there was no hope of climbing out. With the last of his energy, he turned and put his back to the cold brick and sat. His body and joints slowly filled with pain. He hated the heat, but this cold was no comfort.
Down here, in this well with no escape, night grew colder than cold.
Chapter 23: The Lightshy Crow
	And what of him—and what of his companions? 
For they shall shine brightly against the darkness,
And see the heavens? For they shall count them plenty. 
— From The Dark Verses

A brittleness like wrongly tempered glass filled him as he sat in the inch-deep water. 
The brittleness was like he would crack and his teeth would shatter and his bones break. It was a brittleness like his heart would freeze. It stole in, and his blood slipped out, fused with the darkness and fed the tiny creatures of the well. Desperate to slough the brittleness, Tomrin pulled his knees to his chest and reached out with his bound hands to the ropes tying his ankles. Like rotting tree stumps, his fingers worked the ropes, the coarse fibers biting into his fingertips. 
He couldn’t see a feathered thing he was doing. 
Swearing to himself, and afraid the brittleness would consume him, he scooted like a worm into a bar of starlight streaming through the cover’s slats. Here, white starlight streamed, bright as a torch. The light didn’t burn the rough canvas rope on his arm, but Tomrin could see well enough to untie the knot. A Hadras special. His first bit of luck. 
He pried on the knot until it loosened and he was able to work it free, untying a little at a time as the threads of the coarse rope slipped over twists in the braid. When finally free, Tomrin massaged his ankles where the rope had cut into him. His feet splashed up water and echoed as he stood and walked around the well. He searched the walls with his shoulders and arms and face, looking for a way to climb out. The gaps between the blocks made him think he could use them for hand holds if only he could find a way free of the ropes on his wrists.
He tried rubbing the rope on the gaps, the sharpest he could find, but soon tired. He was so tired and weak. It was going to take everything just to climb out. “I still have time,” he told himself, even though it was slipping away. He still needed to fight Rennly to save the glass shop. One thing his father had said of the old money men, they wanted to see that Tomrin and Robles met their obligations; they had made that a stipulation.
Tomrin swore at them and at Rennly as he collapsed to his knees and sat once more in the water. It seemed colder. Tomrin forced himself to his knees and began searching the ground at the bottom of the well for something to cut the rope. Rocks in the silt had long since lost their sharp. When he found a bone, he hoped for a minute that it was the hilt of a knife, a blade still attached, but it was just as useless as the rounded stones. He dropped the bone into the water. Shlunk. Tomrin continued his search. Even rusted, a knife... He came up with nothing.
He sat, kicked out his legs, wanting to lay down. The well was just wide enough for him to stretch out. He stared at the white edges of the hole in the cover above. 
“You don’t know sacrifice,” he muttered to himself. What was Hadras thinking putting bleeding toxin on a non-sacrificial knife? Everyone knew a sacrificial knife had to be triangular; the toxin was to insure that the sacrifice bleed out. “I’m my own feathered sacrifice now.”
Tomrin laughed through chattering teeth.
Bound in the Dark [?]
His dry wit evaporated him as his fear mounted. 
He pulled at his rope until he worried his arms might crack in two. The skin under the rope split. Finally the pain forced him to stop his thrashing. He checked his chest wound. He was still bleeding to death. He tried to put pressure on it, but his father’s knot on his was all but impossible to press hard enough to stem the flow. 
Each breath came more shallow, and Tomrin could tell he was suffocating.
In a puddle of water flavored with his own watered down blood, he tried to let go of breathing. He wasn’t trying to die, but if sleep came and death with it: Life only prolonged the agony. He let his eyes slowly close.
The starlight dimmed and shadows reared. 
For a time he floated above his body then merged with the darkness. This was all there was left of him. Defeating Rennly, running the glass shop, were gone. The dead had no dreams, no hopes, no joys, and that was what he was. He was a spirit filled with fear and anger. He was not the kingbird of glass. He was not the kingbird of anything. And if drug before Seasargus what would he have to show for his disobedience? Less than Master Laz, that was for sure…
And in the darkness, the Luster called to him: Taste me, and you can destroy anyone in your way.
Tomrin forced himself back into his body and willed his heart to beat. Ka-thud. Ka-thud. Ka-thud. He was standing now. He held hands out in front of himself. Burning sunlight drenched the ropes which bound him. Somehow dawn had come and the Luster gone.
Who are you, Tomrin Ocrin?
Tomrin feared he knew the answer.
And He Shall Be Pinioned To The Shadow Line [?] 
He squinted at the braids twisted about his wrists. 
“I,” he muttered, unsure of himself. “I am the Lightshy Crow.” 
His voice echoed in the well—in his ears and in his head--and he became more sure of himself.
The fetters at his wrists were but fibers of braided canvas, crude and flammable. Time itself would rot them to dust. It and them were nothing; nothing compared to the awesome power calling, just out of reach. If he could command the ambrosia in the Wellspring. He could direct it at the knot and it would have no choice but to give way to him. He could pull down the well cover, and cast it into fire, or shatter it with ice. He could set fire to the steppes. Or not. Tear down tyrants and set up empires. The seas would boil at his command. He had the power to crack Serathus open like an egg, to crush his enemies like insects, yet none would dare to oppose him. Magic, fear, and death? The gods would bow to him. He was the Corvine Man. He was the haunter of lore, the dreadnaught known as the Lightshy Crow.
Fire, ice, shadow and something akin to strength or will flowed into him. The four of them chocked his arteries full. 
The mass in his chest under the scales uncoiling, a sword unsheathed in anger or a sail unfurling in the wind of a storm. It expanded out from him. It  had never been small, and now only a tiny core of it stayed with him as the rest expanded out into the outer reaches of earth and space. It covered everything, the earth, the moon, the stars and the vast emptinesses in between. And he stood at the center, a beacon, folding and warping the fluids. It was much deeper than he had imagined glass the day Master Laz died.
The Wellspring lay all around him, up and down and side to side. 
Liquid ice filled it. Where there was ice, there was fire and it burned the ice. Or maybe the ice grew and the fire burned in reverse. It was confusing, and masked in shadows. The shadows cast shadows of their own. And each mote of fire and ice and shadow were woven together by countless threads, or spools of the fourth substance.
It and they were burning in his veins and glowed almost too bright in the Wellspring.
A Simple Matter [?]
He fought the strands of power ripping through him. He glowed brighter as he netted up the ice and shadow in the wilful threads. Willvane. Tomrin remembered its name, and it made sense now. Controlling the willvane, he shrank it and the ice and shadows to nothing, leaving only fire burning in him.
Sweeping his hands, he cast the fire out through his wrists. The fire flared as it burned the canvas rope. The light blinded him. “Ahh!” he cried as it burned more than just the canvas. The smell of burnt flesh and rope filled the well. 
Tomrin’s second sight dissipated, taking the Luster with it.
Free [?]
He pulled free of the burning rope.
The fire at his wrists had shifted to his hands and came out his palms. They burned like he had hammered freezing spikes into them. Despite the fire’s intense power, Tomrin saw it behaved in subtle ways. It coiled and wound in on itself. He blinked at the bright afterimage of coiled fire as he probed his palms with his fingers tips. When he inspected them in the starlight he saw the fire had been hot enough to cook skin to a chalky white ash. The burns themselves were thin as his fingernails but the surrounding flesh was angry from the heat and began to blister. 
“Feathers,” he muttered and picked up his father’s staff and hung its crook over his shoulder. Using the space between the stone block, for handholds, he scaled the stone wall of the well. 
Finally, the cover brushed his head. Holding the wall with one hand Tomrin pushed his other up and under the lid and he wrenched the cover open. Daylight spilled pain into his eyes. He waited for them to adjust before climbing the last bit out. 
He crawled over the lip and onto the ground. Dirt covered the bandage around his chest. His small clothes were as filthy. Both were stained with blood and dirt. Brushing at them he stood with the help of the staff and leaned on it like an old man. The climb had taken the wind out of him and for a second he pondered the crook of the staff. The way the fire curved in the Wellspring, and how it burned and coiled, the staff might prove useful with its crook.
Another Day in the Sun [?]
The sky was a cloudless blue. 
Another hot one, Tomrin thought as he headed for his tent. Emy outside of hers, stared at him. “Good morning, Emy,” he said. “It’s going to be hot,” he added, glancing at the bandage. “I think the bleeding stopped.” When she didn’t say anything, Tomrin leaned the staff on his own tent and ducked inside his own. His hand was sweating and he could feel salt attacking the light burn on his palm. At least it isn’t bleeding, he thought as he sat and began to change. There was so much blood everywhere but the clothes in his backpack were still relatively clean. 
Stripping the bandage off his chest, he poked the sticky scab with his index finger before tucking his feet into his boots. Voices rose outside as he stomped into them. Emy was talking. She certainly liked to talk. The thought brought a smile to Tomrin’s face, but couldn’t understand what she meant. “There is something wrong with Tomrin. I know it.” 
“And he is in his tent?” he heard his father ask.
Tomrin stepped outside, pushing the tent flaps out of the way. Not just Emy and his father, Dable, but his whole family was outside walking towards him. His mother Janet had her hair braided just like Emy. And Hadras, pink and fleshy, with his half a head of hair flung to one side too. 
His father stopped suddenly; his voice said he didn’t believe Emy, but now he spoke almost shrilly. “Where do you think you are going, Tomrin?”
It felt strange not wearing his shirt. The scales were gone—it might take a day or so for them to show, but the wound was there, angry and burnt, proof that they had been cut and burned. Tomrin touched the mass of angry flesh around the scab as he thought about his father’s question. “I guess,” he said looking up. “I’m getting ready to leave.” 
His father eyed the staff. It was as close to him as it was to Tomrin. Dable’s eyes snapped to Tomrin. “Leave for where?” His father’s voice sounded strained and Tomrin squinted at him and the others. He could see fear in everyone but Hadras. His brother’s eyes held curiosity, a rare thing in him.
 “You wouldn't try to stop me now, would you?” Tomrin asked his father. The idea sounded ridiculous. 
“Are you going to leave wearing only pants and boots?” Dable asked. He took a step forward; the step put him closer to the staff. 
Tomrin held up his hand. He didn’t want to have to hurt his father. It was the lies of the gods that had made him do what he had done. “You shouldn’t try to stop me,” he said. “Come with me. You all can come. But we must hurry,” he said. He nodded at the animals. “Someone could stay to help Hadras drive them in, but for now, they would slow us down.” 
“Are you going to turn yourself in now?” Emy asked.
“No,” Tomrin said. “No one is turning anyone in. That is all over now,” he added looking not at her, but at his father. He was beginning to worry someone was about to get hurt. His father and mother both could be so stubborn. 
“Is it really?” Dable asked, squinting.
“Yes. I am returning to the glass shop.”
“Don’t be arrogant, Tomrin,” his mother chided. 
Snapping Point [?]
“No! You listen to me!” Tomrin said. “You’ve tried to tell me what to do all my life. I’m sorry but that time is over. I am no longer a child but a man!” 
“Then act like one,” Dable Ocrin said. “Take responsibility for what you are. The gods will punish us—Us!—if you aren’t Purified.” 
“The gods are nothing but toothless birds worried about their feathers. If you are so afraid of them, hide. Stay here in this waste, but for your own good, don’t stand in my way. I have no more patience for it. I am not evil because I am Peregrine, no more so than for the Mark.” 
Dable went for the staff, grabbing it from where Tomrin had leaned it against the tent.
Tomrin moved without thinking. One second he was a step or two away from the staff, the next he wrapped his hands around the staff. 
His father was bigger and stronger, but when his Dable tried to strike him with the shepherd’s staff, Tomrin shifted and slowed the swing and avoided the staff connecting. Dable puffed and sweated while Janet yelled at the both of them to stop. Tomrin dodged the next dampened swing. The third, Tomrin played into the swing dragging his father off balance and into the tent. 
A tent pole snapped under the weight as Dable crashed into it, collapsing half of Tomrin’s tent. Dable landed on his canvas-tarped bed crushing it. Janet rushed to her husband. “I hope you’re happy! she wailed as she helped him to sit up. “You’ve hurt your father!”
Other Points [?]
Tomrin picked up the staff. 
Tomrin didn’t feel happy or sad, but resigned. Talking, trying to reason with his family, was a waste of time and effort. He was getting nowhere with sense. “Stay here then, waste your lives in search, and never leave until you find a Serath’s feathers.”
“Never to leave until we find a feather?”
“Or come with me now,” Tomrin said, holding out his hand to his father.
Janet helped Dable to his feet and they stepped off the fallen tent. “Who are you to dictate to me?” Dable said, balling a fist and shaking it at Tomrin. “I made you!” 
Tomrin worried what he might do as confusion floated across the surface of his own anger. “Who am I?” he shouted as the Luster gripped him. He quoted. “The wind stops, and mountains kneel to what mists conceal. The earth quakes, and hearts break. The light fades, and the dead walk in his shadows made!”
His mother gasped.
The four ambrosia entered Tomrin as he drank from the Wellspring with fire and ice, shadow and will. They burned. He was great, and they were terrible. And it was glorious. With both hands he held the staff high. “I came into this desert to master the staff,” he said. The ambrosia swirled in his veins. “And I have done it!”
Tomrin wove as he channeled. The ice, shadow and will became as nothing. He cast the fire into the staff as he lowered it by the crook with his right hand. The butt of the staff he hammered into his canvas tent. Fire burst from the staff’s crook and the butt. Flames burst everywhere but on the staff's crook where he held it. The fire roared bright and he shouted as he cast the flaming staff into the inferno that he had made. “Who am I?” he screamed. “Who am I? I am the Lightshy Crow!”
His parents and brother and sister scattered running from him, and from the burning tent.
An Unwelcome Inferno [?]
Tomrin shadowed his face with his arm and stepped back from the burning tent as the other ran.
He called for them to stop as the second sight faded and he lost sight of the Wellspring filled with ambrosia overlying the world. Now I really do need their help. To burn his pack and clothes was foolish. He touched his pocket. The billfold was in his other pants. They and it—and all the bankdraws and patents—were burning. Tomrin only thought about the money for a moment. What he needed was a shirt, and food and water. 
Tomrin tossed the staff into the flames “Now will you help me?” he called out to his family who had gathered.
“What do you want?” Dable asked, turning, keeping his distance. The others hurried over to him. 
“I need a shirt,” Tomrin said. “And a water bag and something to eat. It’s going to be a long day for me, walking out of here.” 
“We don’t wear shirts,” his father said stubbornly. 
“I have a shirt,” said Hadras. 
“Thank you, brother,” Tomrin said. “Go get it.” 
Tomrin continued as Hadras ran to his tent. “And a water bag and something to eat.” Dable nodded to Emy and Janet and they hurried away. 
“And that’s it?” Dable said. 
“No,” Tomrin said. He glanced over to the old myrrh tree. It had a gnarled branch he wanted. “Help me make a walking stick?” Tomrin walked to the tree, it was already smelling strong in the morning heat. “This branch,” he said to his father. “It is almost perfect for my design.” 
“And what design is that?” Dable asked when Tomrin directed him to break it such that its double crook, like that of a cane, was preserved. Dable broke the branch, carach, and began straightening the ends with his knife.
Tomrin answered. “I’m not exactly sure, but it seems the first thing I have to do is fight Rennly and save the glass works from him. Then, who can say?” 
Dable tucked away his knife, and held out the walking stick. “My son, the Lightshy Crow.” There was a touch of pride in his voice. 
Hadras hurried back with a tallow nightshirt. Tomrin didn’t raise the hood over his head when he put it on. The water skin from Emy, he slung over his shoulder. Then with his walking stick in one hand and the dried flat cake his mother gave him in the other, Tomrin said his goodbye. 
“You could stay with us,” Emy said. “You could find a feather. The gods would forgive you too.” Her sadness filled him with his own. 
Tomrin glanced away to the horizon at his left. “I’m afraid you will have to find your feathers out here alone. Now that you have all helped me, you can’t come back without one.”
“What about Rennly now?” Hadras asked.
“Still as true as ever.”
“What’s that mean?” Emy asked, but Hadras hushed her as Dabel began to command them all to try to control the fire.
The Bug, the Bull, and the Human Kind [?]
Tomrin headed west to Woolad.
His foot stopped aching, and after he got moving—and the flatbread was eaten—he was able to walk without a limp. He didn’t have time to limp. By the moment, the sun grew higher in the east. I’m coming, Rennly.
The rolling plains of the lower steppes concealed life and death. Bones washed clean by the scavengers slowly sunk into the soil as they cracked. A buzzard hawk, or maybe it was a turkey vulture, circled wobbed overhead and the insects, scarabs with black shells, worked the scattered dung left by nomad animals.
The burning sun arched overhead, Tomrin realized that that wasn’t it at all. There was something deeper here. Something he couldn’t explain, only that every beetle he saw cleaning the desert might have been any other. Only in a different stage of life. Just like glass, as deep as he could see, there was so much more. All he knew was the surface. 
Just like the Wellspring or Pond as he heard Marten call it. His understanding was intuitive, but under the surface what lurked? How did it really work? Tomrin could see he was a novice, Lightshy Crow or not. He needed to know more. 
His pace lagged as he pondered what he saw in the Pond as he neared the Eastern Highway.
Another Light [?]
There was another beacon in the Pond directly in front of him.
Tomrin stopped when he was still several miles from Woolad, a league or better. The steppes gave way to the farms and he could see the mountain peaks in the far distance. The Emerald Mountains beyond Menad were washed out as if painted gray. 
Was the beacon another person? If I can see them, can they see me? The beacon had to be as far away as Woolad. It seemed below ground? A trick of the mind? Or was it that Woolad was lower than the surrounding area? And the beacon?
It took Tomrin a moment to accept the truth. I’m not alone. 
The idea gave him no comfort.
Chapter 24: Ripples on the Pond
	Avarice is a price a wise man never pays.
		—A Orioles proverb

The rising sun glared at Tomrin’s face and eyes.
The farms near the road squatted, short affairs overlooking rolling fields which should have sprouted wheat and barley, or alfalfa or cabbages, or whatever seeds the farmers had planted. The birds were gone with seeds this year. For the farmers, it was a mercy there was no wind, only the stale hot air of summer came too soon.
Tomrin waited until the dusty strip of road wandering through the gently rolling hills cleared of traffic before breaking from the line of shrubs to enter the highway. He wasn’t exactly sure why he needed to avoid being seen—something from a tract maybe—but he kept his eyes on the road, and his mind on the light in the Pond. 
His own movements seemed to stir up vortices in it--maybe? It was hard to tell with the chaos possessing the willvane. Tomrin switched hands with the walking stick and walked the road, heading east toward Woolad and Menad, towards the other beacon. He wished he knew for sure what it meant, what or who it was, but at this distance he couldn’t quite tell if it was moving about or if it was just him and the road. 
At a couple of miles out, he figured he would have to stop for sure to gain reference. As he approached the town, his unease grew steadily as the farms pushed closer together. Sometimes Tomrin could glance down into them and see lone trees and outhouses, other times there was nothing to see but the embankment. Further south and north the farms were larger, but here the fields were not much larger than three or four of the in-town plots. No one waved or called to him, and he simply walked by trying to remain inconspicuous. 
A mile out, he was certain the light in the Pond was coming for him. What are the chances? 
He was the Lightshy Crow, but what exactly did that mean? If the beacon was something like a False Daughter, or even a real one? Tomrin worried a man from the porch to his left might see him, and he quickened his pace. The old quarry road was just ahead. He turned onto it. Don’t run, don’t run. 
The road carved north around town and for stretches Tomrin snuck peeks into Woolad. He hoped he might be able to see whoever was tracking him. He pulled the hood of his brother’s nightshirt over his sweaty head. If I can see them, they can see me.
The First Ripple [?]
Suddenly there was a stirring in the Wellspring.
It was similar to when he had casted the first two times. He stopped his feet and watched. At the distance of a mile Tomrin wasn’t exactly sure what he saw. For a minute the willvane rippled. Then just as suddenly the casting stopped. The light was gone from the pond. Who or whatever simply vanished. 
Tomrin stood for a moment, leaning on his walking stick, stunned. His unease sprouted stalks of doubt. What just happened? What did it mean? Doubt forced him to question his readiness to return to Menad. Things were happening he didn’t understand. I don’t know anything, he realized. Daughters, False or true, were practiced in their arts.
He ran, not bothering to use his walking stick, as images of Master Lazoloth dead flashed in his mind. I can’t kill a woman, he thought as he ran. Can I? The idea seemed beyond him, but he certainly didn’t want to find out how far he would go if a Daughter or censor tried to take him captive. A single night in the old dead well had been bad enough.
At the first of the natural side gully of the washout that nestled Woolad, the old quarry road circumambulated, but Tomrin was able to glance down into town, towards King Street as it joined the Eastern Highway. The people on the streets were small as ants, but where he looked, Tomrin saw a group of them, three of them in black. 
At this distance he struggled to make out races, but suspected they were Orioles.
He pulled his head lower as he stared. The three appeared to be looking directly at him. A woman with long hair pointed at him. The men were perhaps the same Orioles censors from the fair.
A glint of sunlight caught off one of the black clad men’s chest. Definitely censors, Tomrin thought, and the woman was almost certainly a Daughter. If her pointing was any indication, she could track him!
Fire Power [?]
Tomrin’s mind raced as he turned and ran. 
He would have to lay a trap. He needed to head for the steppes. No, for the mountains. He would have to pick them off, kill them one at a time. No--all at once. Even the woman? I don’t want to kill anyone! The woman had gone invisible in the Pond; he needed to learn her secret. How did she do it?
His heart pounded as the heat began boiling him alive. He flung back his hood and ran, his feet pounding road, the dust behind him leaving an obvious trail. She can see me through the hills! It was a terrifying thought. What do I do? He would have to make a stand. He would have to overawe them. Or learn her disappearing trick. Menad might have to wait. The glass shop might have to wait. Feathers! He would return, to make a new glass shop. A better one.
He swore as he ran. “Some Corvine Man I’ve turned out to be! Already backing out of promises to myself.”
Past the old quarry, a small hill, less than a few wagon loads, made of crushed white quartz had been raised at the mouth of the Old Quarry. The next gap he came to, Tomrin looked down into Woolad, but didn’t see the women or the censors. They could be anywhere in town or chasing after him on the Old Quarry Road. I need to get to the trees. He could slow them down, if not hide in them.
He turned off the Old Quarry Road onto a side road and headed east by north. 
Only farms and timberlands lay between him and the Emerald Mountains.
The Trees [?]
Tomrin left the road and ran straight towards the Emerald Mountains.
All hope of reaching Menad in time evaporated as he hustled through a field. The trees he headed for were some of the oldest and easiest to get lost in in the area, The streams inside the trees were always changing. He stomped through fields he’d only once walked by before, years ago. 
The first wooden fence he scaled without problem throwing his walking stick over first and jumping down from the top cross board. He picked the stick up from his crouch and sped on, cutting through the next field at an angle, its furrows at awkward spacing forcing him to hop and jump as he ran, stutter-stepped to the next field line. An Orish slave yelled at him and for the farmer as he ran.
Tomrin didn’t stop and the slave didn’t follow, a dog all bark and no bite. 
I should steal a horse. The censors and Daughters would have horses, and his single myrrh branch left him unprepared to face them if they were trying to rush ahead of him as he turned north. 
He saw the trees as he bounded over the next fence and landed hard on his foot. He was too winded to swear, but picked up his walking stick and looked around.
A Quick Moment [?]
Several women sat on the porch of the farm house. 
Tomrin pulled the hood of his shirt up and over. With his walking stick he hobbled away from them towards the far fence. “Who are you?” one of the women called out to him. “Who are you, handsome stranger?” She repeated when he only waved with his walking stick in hand, keeping his eyes on the fence.
“No one!” Tomrin called out as he limped using the stick. Handsome? Tomrin shook his head. My tail feathers. He hopped the fence and took the side road and headed north, mostly straight at the woods.
“Hey, stop, stranger!” 
It was the woman, sounding breathless. She had run after him! Tomrin pulled his hood further down as he turned. “Are you hurt, why are you running through our field?” the woman demanded. She was a handsome young Rubish woman, kissed by the sun.
She was a touch more assertive than was healthy.
Tomrin held a hand out to stop her. “Stop!” he said loudly. “To follow me is death!” 
“Don’t be silly, Jal. Why are you playing a prank on me, Jal Clar?” The woman said, stepping closer, but more slowly, a curious cat not sure if the bird it stalked was larger in the claws than it.
Tomrin feared the woman would know him if she got too close and that she might follow Jal Clar if he ran. “No, I am not Jal Clar!” he said. “I am a Feathered Man, woman! Stay back!” 
“Jal!” she said “You sound strange.” The woman hadn’t quite stopped. “What’s going on ? What are you saying?”
The woman’s persistence flipped Tomrin’s frustration at this pointless stop to anger. The Luster greeted him like an old friend when he breathed in a heavy breath. He could raise armies of undead minions up to frighten her. Or rain fire from the clear blue sky. Comets! He could show her death and destruction awaited her in this foolishness. The Pond was all around and it was filled to brimming with sweet, sweet ambrosia. He drank in the tiniest of tiny sips. Holding the walking stick at a slant across his body, he casted and wove as one. “Be gone, pest! Do not bother the Lightshy Crow!” 
he wove willvane to vanquish the ice and shadow as fire exited him into the staff and shot out in a flash of light and fire. The woman squawked and the sweet nectar left Tomrin. 
He tamped the burning end of his walking stick into the dirt to snuff it. 
Wide Eyes [?]
The woman’s eyes went wide and for a second Tomrin worried she might die of fright. 
“Go,” he said. “Run. Hide.” The woman turned and with a scream ran back the way she came, away from him and the scent of myrrh burning. 
Tomrin didn’t wait to see if she decided to turn back around but turned and ran himself, too much precious time lost already. He needed to get to the trees. His stick was shrinking and he cursed it and ever having tasted the ambrosia. Time! That was what he needed. I need time! Then he could find the way to go invisible in the Pond. He could evade his pursuers, he just needed time.
Feathered time!
Borrowed Time [?]
The road he was on ended at the woods near a house in a small hollow and a large elm out front.
With no path in the trees Tomrin would make terrible time through them and be caught on the other side trapped if he didn’t take a path when his pursuers did. Which way? he asked himself, but he couldn’t remember if the Calvera place was west or east of the path. He’d only been out here once before—before the old woman Calvera died. Now the house crumbled in on itself. East or West? Tomrin couldn’t decide. He picked up a flat stone. Dirt stuck to one side. “Dirty side go east, clean go west.” He flipped the stone and caught it, dirty side up. “East.”
Up and down the rolling hills of the tree line, Tomrin hurried, using his walking stick like a cane. Each hill he crested brought him greater trepidation. You should have gone west. East had to be the wrong way, but he kept at it, he couldn’t turn back now. 
Relief flooded through him when he saw a path leading up and into the tree line. 
Dust, however, was coming off the road to the south behind the hillock that hid the road from view. Tomrin hurried down the path. When he entered the trees on the path he glanced back.
Up the road, three censors and a woman rode horses at a trot. Tomrin thought he could see the gleam of the woman’s silk dress. Yellow and golden in the sunlight. Tomrin ran to the path and into the woods. Hooves thundered behind him and men shouted like dogs barking on the hunt. 
They are hunting me down like an animal. And they had horses. The shouts and the sounds of houses grew closer as Tomrin pushed into the forest. The path narrowed further. It was a footpath and might stall them some. Tomrin heard a man with a sharp Orioles accent call out. “Dismount!” 
Another voice called out. The pitch was high and that of a woman. “He went in. Be wary.”
“Wary?” a man asked. “Not a chance!”
“Don’t be a fool! He can dance!”
Yes, he can, Tomrin thought as the Luster called to him. He would not be hunted like a wild animal for sport, not for another man’s glory. And not when the sun and heat had turned the world around him to tinder. The leaves of the trees all but begged for fire. All but begged for a match. And was he not the Corvine Man? A Feathered Man In Black? He pulled in the ambrosia. 
Behind him the woman yelled shrilly to her men. “Watch out! He’s channeling!”
And so he was.
To Be [?]
The Corvine Man encased shadow and ice in a net of shrinking willvane. 
He tossed his walking stick from hand to hand as he switched which side of the path he burned, ambrosia from the pond setting fire to the trees as they stretched out skeletal fingers into the path. Choosing the most curved branches from either side of the path, he lit two columns of flame trailing behind him. Soon branches exploded with fire as sap boiled.
He drank more ambrosia, channeling from the pond the fire, ice and the shadow and will. Then he closed the channel before things got out of hand. He only wanted to light a few trees on fire. Now great shards of ice slicked through him. Death, his and everyone’s, seemed a promise from the shadows. And the willvane was bent on wrestling him to the forest floor. His feet stopped as he wove. The power of the shadow and ice seemed too much but he wove, and slowly the three dissipated.
Was and Am [?]
Tomrin turned around as fire burned inside him. 
He held the walking stick pointed between columns of fame on either side as the trees burned. The men had stopped, afraid of the inferno that separated them from him. The heat was intense, it shined right through his hood. “Stay back,” he said to the men. “I don’t want to have to kill you!” He shouted over the sound of the trees spreading their flames and sap pockets bursting.
The woman pushed forward. When she saw his walking stick pointed at her she hid behind the front man. “No one defies the gods!” she said as she pushed her head up behind a censor’s shoulder.
The fire scorched inside him, and Tomrin reached out with his free hand and grabbed hold of a drooping branch that curved back in towards the trunk of its tree. He pushed the remaining inside himself fire into it. The flaky bark caught fire as raw flame spilled into the tree. He removed his hand and stepped backswards as he held the fire inside the tree, a poor vessel for ambrosia, but a vessel nonetheless. As he spoke he continued to back away. “One does defy the gods!” he said. “The Lightshy Crow does!” 
He wasn’t sure they heard him because he lost control of the fire in the tree, and the it exploded, erupting with fire.
KARCHAK! 
Amongst the Wicked [?]
Tomrin turned and ran swatting at the burning splinters that landed on his arms. It was a marvel he was still alive. He’d gone beyond playing with fire which he feared to playing something he only slightly understood which was clearly way more dangerous.
He was more bothered by that and the fact that he was certain the whole stand, east to west, would burn because of him. He didn’t want to be this destroyer. He wanted to tear down the wicked, but wasn’t he amongst the wicked now? 
As he ran headlong through the wind break and out the other side he pondered what it meant for his humanity. He worried he was falling down to the level of that of a naked beast. He turned to look at the Emerald Mountain as Menad farmland stretched before him. To his left, somewhere was Menad, nestled between the rolling hills. The city was rich partly due to the burning woods at his back. 
Tomrin glanced back only once to see the black and gray of the smoke streaming toward the heavens. He’d bought himself time, but he wasn’t convinced it would be enough. “No,” he scolded himself. “You can’t give up.” He would escape and make it in time to fight Rennly too. “Somehow.” Some-feathered-how! 
He started by putting one foot in front of the other.
Horses [?]
Several horses pastured in the distance.
Tomrin turned towards them. Speed was what he needed. He drank from his waterskin, without slowing. He had fallen to too slow a pace already.  He needed to find water too. And horses meant water too. 
No money and no bank notes--not that he could use them here. He would have to steal one of the horses and ride it bareback. Tomrin wondered if this was what he had become as well: a thief, stealing and taking. I only want to borrow a horse, he reassured himself. And he didn’t even want to do that. He convinced himself as he neared the fence that penned in the horses. A horse would do no good in the rocky crags of the Emerald Mountain, and it wasn’t thieving if the animal would find its way back home. 
Tomrin climbed the fence after slipping his walking stick under the cross boards, hewn from a wavy aspen, white from age as if they had been painted. He half expected some decrepit old farmer to come hobbling out the farmhouse. It also looked like it had just barely survived the Cracking of the World Egg. 
Tomrin crouched as he walked over to the nearest horse, just as he had done as he approached, hiding from the windows of the farm house and from anyone peering out of them. The horse was a bay and she looked young, maybe a few years old, but seemed broken to humans. She didn’t shy away when he reached up a hand as if to feed her. The filly was not impressed and snorted at his hands lack of treats and pulled back her head. 
“Whatever girl,” Tomrin said and moved away. A filly was too flighty for him anyway. What he needed was a nag. Something that could still move but wouldn’t think to test his abilities as a horseman. Keeping low, Tomrin scrambled over the dusty pasture ground to the trough with water in it. Green moss grew on the inside and out. The horse drinking the stagnant water sported a smoky white coat, a gelding of some age. The old boy looked at Tomrin with dull eyes and went back to drinking. “There’s a good boy,” Tomrin said as he patted the pale horse’s front flank. 
Tomrin directed the horse with his walking stick over to the gate. He popped the latch and pushed open the wooden gate. It creaked on its hinges. He had no choice but to brazen it out. Throwing a glance at the farm house, he led the horse outside into the pasture and closed the gate. 
Reaching over the gelding’s back with his walking stick in one hand Tomrin swung up and onto the horse. Tough old bones poked into his back side.
“This is going to be a long ride.”
On a Pale Horse [?]
Adjusting his grip on the horse’s coarse main hair, he gently nudged the beast in the flank with his boots. The old thing turned back and looked at him. “Go,” Tomrin said, kicking the horse harder. The horse made a surly noise and began to plod down and away from his paddock. With several more boots to the ribs, Tomrin convinced the gelding to trot. By guiding the horse with his walking stick, Tomrin finally pointed the tired old thing in the correct direction.
Tomrin threw back the hood of his shirt. The wind stirred up by the horse felt cool. Fathoms disappeared behind him. He was going to make it. He only had to set fire to the windbreak, scare the daylights out of a woman, and steal a horse. But he was going to make it. 
After a few minutes he stole a glance back. A streamer of dust rose up into the clear sky. How could they have made it here already? He kicked his horse as hard as he could. “Go!” he shouted at the pale hack under him. But it was no use, the horse was old and already tired and refused to go any faster. You should have stolen the bay. She had spirit. Probably break my neck on it. But he bet it knew how to gallop. 
The steamer of dust behind him grew closer and closer. Finally, Tomrin pulled on the gelding’s mane. “Woah! Woah! Stop!” he called. There was no point running the poor thing to death. It wouldn’t help him a bit. His pale horse came to a full stop. 
Tomrin slid off the horse’s back and stretched his legs. He was going to be bruised on his back side for days. If he lived that long. He waited with his walking stick in hand and the horse at his back.
The brown cloud topped a rise and two riders drove their mounts straight at him like they wanted to break their necks or their horses. One was larger than the other, a man and his dun coloured horse stood nearly as tall as the other—and the rider too.
Her horse—for sure it was a her—was darker. The two were the lady Margretta and her counselor Marten on the dun. It had to be. The woman’s hair whipped back and forth in ruby currents. Tomrin knew how she had found him. The pond roiled around him, but just like the Daughter which had disappeared, Lady Margretta stirred the Pond not even a ripple. 
Tomrin lowered his walking stick as the two pulled their horses to a stop. The dun looked tired. The old boy was covered in sweat, but the bay seemed hardy and hale. “Hello, Master Tomrin.” Marten called out as he dismounted.
“Good day!” Tomrin replied
“Nice to see you are still alive and not killed on this fine spring day,” Marten said, eying him.
“Yes,” Tomrin replied jovially. “It is a fine day for a nice ride in the country. And a really, really great day to be alive.” 
The man laughed, and Tomrin found himself laughing too.
Chapter 25: The Walking Stick
	So and if you don’t want flies, don’t kill the spiders.
		—From the Living Book of the Dead

Margretta slid off her horse, her blue riding dress split to her hip. Her long shapely legs, and blackbooted feet, reached the ground. The bay’s reigns she let drop. She wasn’t on the ground a second and she was pulling off her leather riding gloves. Those at least she had rolled down. She flung back her hair and handed Marten her gloves. Her piercing blue eyes glinted flinty glass as she stared at Tomrin like a cat wary of its prey. “You look like an eagle looking at a lynx,” Tomrin said, switching the two in his mind in the hopes of keeping her off balance. The way she was staring, he wondered if he was going to have to use his walking stick after all. 
“Tomrin Ocrin,” she said. “You I see you didn’t receive my warning. I knew I should have delivered it myself.” 
“I received it,” Tomrin said, glancing at Marten.The angry woman’s ire seemed misdirected, But the Orish man at her side stood impassive as if this were a court and it wasn’t yet his turn to speak. The man also did not wear his vest, but a leather jerkin, dark pants and boots. It was not a uniform Tomrin had ever seen, but he knew he was seeing Counselor Marten, the pleasant and able lawyer, as the soldier. At his hip a dagger, a large knife or sword hung sheathed in a triangular black leather. It looked like a sacrificial knife, but it is were one it was the largest Tomrin had ever seen. The hilt sported a green gem and looked like an emerald gazing out from an ivory orb. 
“You received it?” Margretta said. “You might have heard it, but you obviously didn’t receive it.” Her voice was not shrill, but there was a harsh edge to it and an inhuman indifference to her ire, almost feral. “Now, I must deal with the consequences.” She stepped towards him.
Tomrin took a step back. The front quarter of his stolen horse stopped him. The horse made a questioning sound and Tomrin raised his stick slightly into the air as if to shade his eyes. “What consequences are those?” 
The woman suddenly looked every bit a lady, a warrior princess, and a Daughter—albeit False. She glared not at the walking stick with an irritation evident. “Well for starters, you need to be warded,” she said. “I’m not sure you realize but every Daughter from here to Menad can see you channeling. Can’t you see it?” 
“I see the churning.”
“Then you know you must be warded, and now! Already Daughters of Heaven’s Glory are looking for you.” 
Tomrin spared a blink towards the west. What looked like a cloud had gathered. It was smoke from the burning break. “One Daughter and three censors,” he said and turned back to Margretta. “And this ward will make me disappear?” 
“Yes, it will,” she said and stepped to within striking distance of his walking stick. “I must cast a web on you.” 
Tomrin held up his hands, and held her off with it. “Teach it to me.” he said, “This web of disappearance” 
“That’s not what it’s called- “ 
“What is it called?” 
Margretta sighed and Tomrin could feel she was going to be a difficult teacher. “It doesn’t matter what its called. We haven’t the time.” 
“Why not?” Tomrin asked. If he disappeared, he could still make it to Menad in time to fight Rennly and save the glass shop. “How long will it take?” 
“Days, weeks, maybe months,” Margretta said. “Maybe you will be a quick study with the willvane as you are with sunfire, but if I guess right that stick is a crutch and in more ways than one.” 
“I am quick,” Tomrin said, resting the end of his walking stick in the dirt. 
“Regardless, the first step is for me to ward you,” said Margretta. “Or do you want to stand here until your new friends arrive?”
“And if I refuse?” Tomrin asked. “Then what?”
The Darklit Pond [?]
Margretta scowled at him. “Once already you have refused my offer of help,” she said. “I don’t know who you think you are, Master Ocrin, thinking you can ignore it now. Gaze into the Darklit Pond. Where can you go that Daughter can’t find you? Already your stunts will bring down Heaven’s fury. The sky will fall on you in a storm of feathers. Meteors of sunfire will burn you to your skeleton, and comets of glacier ice will crush and scatter charred and blackened bones—that is Master Ocrin—if Heaven were that forgiving! No, they would kill you and interrogate your corpse. But don’t think that could ever be your fate. Not now. Not now...that you and I have spoken for freely.” 
Marten stepped forward; his hand was on the hilt at his side. “I’m sorry, Tomrin,” he said. “I tried to warn you, not to give into the Luster. You understand. Secrets must be preserved. Lives are at stakes; the balance of them is immeasurable.” 
“Lives?” Tomrin said. “All she cares about is her own. She didn’t care about Master Laz’s.” 
“What is one life versus thousands?” Margretta asked. 
“I refuse to think like that. Master Laz’s life meant something.” 
“He never gave into the Luster, not even at the end, but you have. In this war with Heaven there can be no rogues, no disinterested parties,” Margretta said. “You are with us or against us… And since you already said you want to live.” She cocked her head and raised her eyebrows at him like he was a nughty boy.
Tomrin raised his myrrh walking stick and scratched the itch on his chest. “Maybe it is you should bow to me,” he said.
Margretta reared back, looking down her skeptical nose at him and laughed. “Ha! Where in the feathers did you get that crazy idea?” she asked, glancing at Marten. 
The lage man blinked blinked. “He thinks he is the Lightshy Crow?” 
Margretta’s icy eyes turned back to Tomrin. “You the Lightshy Crow? Please, Master Ocrin.You start a fire or two and suddenly you think you are living out some legend? Look around you! Do you see palaces and parades? What glory do you have here? Your kingdom of desert and dirt? Do you want me to bow down to you, Master Ocrin? Or will a curtsy do?” The woman curtsied and swore. “Black feathered crows preserve me.” 
“I just...I thought…,“ Tomrin said and lowered his walking stick. 
Willvane [?]
Margretta didn’t have to continue, but she did. “You just thought what? That because you are slightly more precocious than most men, you have to be the Lightshy Crow?” 
“No, because I’m the only one who has drank the ambrosia.” Tomrin said. 
“Really? Is that what you think? You are the only fool man who can dance with a drop of sunfire rushing through his veins?”
“Aren’t I?” 
Margetta scoffed. “No. You are hardly the only one, but you are the most foolish I know who and even they aren’t feathered fool enough to think think I’m bowing to them. You drinking the ambrosia without training, and without wards? What were you thinking? Nothing comes easy. You should know that.”
“We need to hurry,” Marten said. “The recriminations can wait until after we are safely out of this field. Unless we want a battle and this is not good ground.” 
“You’re right, Marten,” Margretta said. “Enough of this foolishness. Now let me ward you.” She stepped forward and touched Tomrin on his shoulder where his neck poked from his brother’s night shirt. “Don’t do anything, don’t talk, don’t distract me. Just hold still.” 
Tomrin found the nearness of her in itself distracting. Her touch was cold and her fingers were clammy from the heat. But he didn’t shy away. What choice did he have? He needed to disappear from those who could see him in the ambrosia. He bet he could learn how to cast the ward faster than Margretta said it took to learn. He wasn’t just slightly more precocious than most men.
The ambrosia around Margretta didn’t seem to stir anymore than the storm already churned, but Tomrin could see tendrils of willvane enter her. These fibers were different, just like the ones that came into him were different when he drank the four ambrosia. But for her, it was only willvane that entered. The fire and ice, and the shadow stayed out. That was a trick he still needed to learn. “Only Willvane?” he said. “How do you do it?” 
“What?” she asked, distracted. “I can only do one at time, just as you can only do all four. Now, hush.”
A Warding [?]
The tendrils from her snaked into Tormin. 
They entered him from her fingertips. Then slowly like a growing cocoon, the tendrils filled him up. It felt like nothing, but Margretta seemed to wrestle with the fibers, moving her body as she struggled to weave the ward. Sweat beaded on her forehead and she blinked drops from her eyes when they ran. Tomrin tried to follow the twists and turns but they were like nothing he had done to control the ice and shadow. His net had been as simple as a spider’s web. Margretta’s ward was an incongruous network of contradictions. It looked like at any moment it would come flying apart, unraveling like a basket full of yarn tossed over a barn.
Then suddenly she stopped pulling in the willvane. She continued casting, continued doing her spelldance. The tendrils of willvane she tried off and finally the last of the ambrosia slipped from her into Tomrin. Then the ambrosia around him shifted. The storm around him subsided. 
Margretta stepped back wiping her hands on her dress before she wiped her forehead of sweat with the back of her forearm. The look she gave Tormin was curious.
“Was that it?” Tomrin asked. “It worked right?” 
“Yes, it worked. It’s just—” 
“What?” Tormin asked. 
“That was harder than it should have been.” 
“What does that mean?” 
“It means,” Marten said. “That we should leave now; the ward is stable—isn’t it? 
“Yes, yes,” Margretta said, shaking herself and blinking. “Marten, take us out of here.” 
“Mount up. We have some riding ahead of us,” the Orish men said. 
“Where are we going?” Tormin asked. 
“Where we have to. To start with the way you were going—” Marten pointed. “—that is until I can find a spot to double back. We might be invisible in the Wellspring, but horses leave tracks, ones still visible in this world.” 
“As long as we make it back to Menad in time to fight Rennly. Today is the last day to save Godly Glassworks.” 
“You are being chased by censors,” Margreta said sounding exasperated. “And how many Daughters? You don’t even know? And you are worried about that glass shop?” 
“Margretta please. You too Master Tomrin. We cannot stand out here wasting time. All I can do is promise I will try, but the safety is my top priority. The more time we waste, the worse the chances any of us will return to Menad intact.”
“You have obligations,” Tomrin said. “I get that. I too have obligations.”
“And we respect that, Master Tomrin. We all have obligations. Mine is to see you two safe out of here… If i can.” 
“Let’s go,” Margretta said. She turned and headed for her bay, snagging her riding gloves from Marten on the way. 
Tomrin turned to his horse. “Sorry old boy, but we ride again.” 
“You really know how to pick a horse,” Marten said, laughing as he mounted his charger.
“I know,” said Tomrin. “Fastest mount this side of Corundum,” Tormin teased. “I don’t even know his name, but I think I’m going to call him Lightning.” 
Marten chuckled. “Let’s hope he still had a little thunder left in him.”
The man led the way, straight towards the nearest peak of the Emerald Mountain. They soon left the current field and came to another, then to a road after the third wide open field. Marten took the road north. At a side road they went east and then doubled back making a circuit but continuing on west until they hit trees. 
Finally after making another circuit and a double back, Marten announced they were heading back to Menad. A road leading south, the old south road, entered Menad from the north, but when they neared Menad, they made another turn, this time back to the east and then Tomrin realized where they were. They were just north of the Eastern Highway. 
Marten called a stop. “We’ll walk from here.” 
Reentry [?]
“I need to get rid of Lightning?” 
“Yes. Can’t really expect to enter Menad on a stolen horse.” 
Tomrin poured out a taster of water in his hand for Lightning. It was a lonely stretch of land ahead and with no water. Then slapping him, chased him off. “Find your way home!”
With the sun in their eyes they walked the Highway into Menad. 
Marten chatted easily and Tomrin learned the name of both his and Margretta’s horses—King’s Gamble and Queen’s Answer. “It’s good to be home,” Tomrin said when he finally glimpsed the Winged Helm Inn.
“Don’t get too comfortable,” Margretta said. “This may have been your home, but not any more.” 
“Why not? You still expect me to leave?” 
“Master Tomrin, I swear. You think everything can just go back to the way it was?” Margretta was shaking her head at him. 
“Why can’t it?” 
“Probably shouldn’t be discussing this out here,” Marten said.
Whatever Margretta wants with me she can have in Menad. The idea of the woman holding something over him rankled and the implied threat made in the field hung between as they walked. 
Home [?]
“We can go faster than this,’’ he said as they neared the Winged Helm Inn. He wanted to go inside and drink tarsk until he couldn’t remember his own name, but even that he could not do.
“I’ll take the horses,” Marten said. “And meet you inside.” 
“This is where you are staying?” Tomrin asked Margretta. 
“Yes. Why?” 
“Let’s just go to your room—and talk,” Tormin said. He was tired of walking, tired of running and he might be able to snag that shell of tarsk if luck turned eyes his way.
“Will you be coming?” Margretta asked Marten.
“I will see you safe to--to where you are going.”
“And where is that?” Tomrin asked. It felt like they had everything planned without him. 
“Inside,” Margretta replied. “I will see to the Queeny myself,” she said to Marten. To Tomrin she said. “Room 204. Go there after me.” 
At the door, Tormin nodded to the door man, but had forgotten his name. Without Robles the man was simple, efficient, and Tomrin hurried inside. The censors had moved on, as had the slavers. Soon the evening crowd would be heading in. When the man behind the bar asked him what he wanted to drink, Tomrin said, “High Spirit tarsk, wait.” He remembered he had no money. “Never mind. I forgot my money in my other pants.” The lie came to his lips. “I’m waiting for a friend.” 
“How about a low spirit? On the Helm,” the man said. “You look like you were chased by the Lighshy Crow himself. Waiting for Robles to return?” 
Tomrin placed his elbow on the bar and ran his hands through his hair. “Thank you; I could. Ah, Yes.” 
The man filled a mug and Tomrin drank it. Robles was back in town, and he wondered what would happen if he were to come through the door. You won’t believe it. I was the Lightning Crow. Then I wasn’t. Now I’m waiting for a False Daughter to take me away, or she’ll kill me.
Robles wouldn’t believe a word of it. 
The evening crowd began filtering in. Tomrin watched for people he knew, like Non and Robles, but it was Margretta, followed by Marten who entered finally. 
Tomrin watched them enter the back hallway and emptied his mug. 
A Word [?]
He stood up and walked around the dias to the hallway. 
The stairs climbed to the top hallway built into the hillside. The free tarsk had twisted in Tomrin’s stomach all the way up the stairs and down the hall. Here the gloom of the lower wall replaced any glimpse of golden sun peaking through skylights. Tormin knocked on the door of 204, nevermind the tap of his walking stick leaving a trail of wump on the floor.
Marten opened the door and Tomrin entered. The man smiled and Tomrin was surprised he was so at ease. The Orish counselor didn’t even glance at the stick. His own weapon seemingly forgotten at his hip. 
Margretta sat at the table, the room’s only furniture save for the bed and dresser and the empty chair opposite her. She closed a small black book the size of a billfold, then set it aside. “Sit,” she told him, the way a queen might command her court. 
Tomrin hesitated. Sitting would disarm him. “Regardless of the price, I am going to be leaving here in a few minutes and heading for the temple,” he said.
“Tomrin, sit.”
Tomrin walked over to the chair, leather padded, with a lat at the top back. He laid his walking stick along it. “I prefer to stand,” he said as he laid his hands on the gnarled stick. 
“No, you intend to be difficult,” Margretta said as Marten rummaged, filling up packs in a hurried way. Margretta glanced at the strange man. Big but agile, smart but deadly, he seemed a strange mix of contradictions, and he was on a mission to see Margretta out the door. 
“Not difficult,” Tomrin said. “But precise as any lawyer. I do not want to leave Menad.” She made to speak, but he plowed over her. “I need to go to the Temple before dark and meet my obligation as a Founder of Godly Glassworks.”
“You think life can continue as it was?” Margretta said, standing. 
Marten zipped a large bag. “I told you he might be difficult about this point,” the big man said without looking up.
Margetta sniffed at him and continued. “We have to leave to continue your training.” 
“If you need to leave then leave,” Tomrin said. “But I want to stay. I will not let you push me around. I was already pushed into something this week I regret. I can’t be helped now, Marten knows, he was there.” 
“Yes? Marten, what is this?” 
Marten looked up from a pack he was stuffing with clothes. “Boys, they like to gamble. It’s in our blood. Can’t you see the boy is gambling now? He’s betting you aren’t going to kill him right here and now. I told you he would be difficult with this glass stuff in some way.”
Margretta sighed. “And no little help from you.” She walked around the table and put a hand on Tomrin’s walking stick. She was so close to Tormin, it made him feel awkward just standing there. “So you want to stay. But the thing is I have to go. I can’t be tied down here.” 
“Then go.” 
“But I can’t leave you here, unattended.” 
“Why not?” Tomrin asked. With her hand on the stick he knew he could not use it fast enough. 
“You need to be warded.” 
“But you warded me.” 
“Yes, and every few days or so you need to be warded again,” Margretta asked. “Did you think it lasted forever?” 
“Well— I—“ 
Margretta took her hand from the stick, and walked back around the table. “Now, sit.” She sat herself. 
Tomrin didn’t move.
By Choice [?]
He considered if she was lying. But Tomrin didn’t know. If he sat his power was diminished. No, maybe it wasn’t. His mind churned as he picked up the stick with one hand. Use it? Don’t? He pulled out the chair. “I will hear you out, then you will hear me out.” Tomrin sat down.
“There are rules.” Margretta began, Marten two carried packs out the door and shut it.   “Rules!” Tomrin demanded, “There is no time for all that. Listen to me, Lady Margretta, I agree I need to go with you, to learn to ward myself. But first...I am going to stand up and walk out of here. I am going to go down to the temple one last time. My brother and I have business we  need to complete.” 
“What business could be so feathered important?” Margretta said, slapping the table. 
“I am a founder of Godly Glassworks,” Tomrin said. “You think I want to go and fight my half-brother? No. I have been avoiding fighting him since I was a child. But he’s found a way to force me to fight him now again. Well, I’m not going to disappoint him.”
“I don’t understand?” Margretta said.
“I have to beat him at staves to complete the terms of our contract. Marten didn’t tell you?” Tomrin added as he stood and began walking to the door.
“It seemed unimportant at the time.” Margretta said. “Same as now.”
“Not to me.”
“Is this money?” Margretta demanded. “You are worried about gold?”
“Gold? This is about lives and livelihoods. I have to save the Glassworks, but not just for myself anymore, but for everyone who depends on it. Rennly is trying to stop me, sure, maybe, but I will stop him first.”
Margretta called after him. “Then what, Tomrin Ocrin?”
Tomrin glanced back at her. “Then I will do what it takes,” he said. “As I always have.” He turned and popped the latch and left the room leaving the tall handsome woman sitting at the table. 
“We leave tonight!” she called out after him.
Tomrin’s walking stick held her answer. Wump, wump.
Chapter 26: The Temple
	And he will burn their temples
Until the ash itself will not mold.
		—From The Dark Verses

Tomrin carried the walking stick up Arcade Avenue at a good clip. One last thing remained before he headed to the Temple to face Rennly: he needed to talk to Robles. The hour was late, but he might catch him still at work—though now it seemed unlikely his friend would still be there. But with the company newly reformed there was no doubt much for his friend to do as Pack Leader. Robles’ll be there, Tomrin told himself as he marched along. He was cutting it close now, himself, with maybe an hour left before the contract’s sunset clause was invoked.
As the silver smiths Tomrin could see the interior of Godly Glassworks stood dark. The glass Seasargus in the window had never flown darker, and the gray tree on the door never blacker. Tomrin hurried up the walkway. The door was locked and he shuffled around the rocks before finally heading back through the dusty alleyway for the back door. It too was locked, but someone had not closed it properly as happened from time to time. Popping the handle, he opened the door to the back room. 
Inside the heat of the kilns filled him with a delight as he passed them on his way to the front. Things were working out at the shop. Though the shop wasn’t being minded as closely as it needed to be: the mid door too was open.
Up front. Tomrin didn’t stop by his old workstation but headed straight to Master Laz’s office. He needed paper and a pen to write with—a note for Robles. Paper he found on the desk, but the inkwell was dry. A graphite rod used for making glass stamps, however, worked just as well. He pulled one from Master Laz’s middle desk drawer and began to write. 
Robles,
I am leaving Menad and the glassworks. I know I will lose my share but I am fine with that. I wanted to see you in person, but you weren’t here. I am going to the Temple to fight Rennly as per our contract. Don’t worry, I will beat him.
Your friend, Tomrin.
P.S. The back door was locked, but not properly latched.
He folded the paper and put a To the Pack Leader on it. Setting down the graphite rod, he stood up and left the office. Back outside the glasswork he closed the door. Lifting the handle the latch clicked. Snick.
The sun had climbed perilously low on the horizon now and Tomrin hurried back to the Winged Helm Inn, and turned down Third Street. The setting sun filled the west with glare against the cart traffic. Tomrin found himself too tired to tell himself he didn’t look out of place wearing his brother’s nightshirt, and hoped people stared at him as blankly as he stared into the glare. 
Finally downtown the shadow of the temple’s spire stretched out over the houses and the road to the east. The tower’s wooden heights scraped the sky as Tomrin passed the courthouse and circled up the stoneway outside the temple. In the shadow of the spire, his walking stick clunked against the pavers. He glanced up at the high balconies where a Serath might land, and felt he understood them better now.
Up there they were safer, far away from the likes of him.
Temple [?]
The wooden doors were carved from oak and locked from the inside. 
Tomrin frowned at the main doors. Curious. The temple doors were never locked save for on special occasions—or when a new Daughter had been found. He wondered if they had been closed because of him. But I’ve not been caught. A new Daughter rarely appeared. Not as rare as a male, but rare. Not that anyone liked to admit that one of their own required purification.
Tomrin pushed through the dead shrubbery and headed around to side doors cantors, censors, and Daughters used. He tried the set. They were also locked. He knocked with his walking stick. Cong, cong. Solid echoes from the inside.
“Feathers,” he swore under his breath and continued on to the next set. 
On the west side the backdoor was locked like the others. Cong! Cong! Cong! No one came running. He thought about going to the south door but continued to smack the door with his walking stick. Konk, konk, konk. Konk, konk, konk. 
“What’s going on down there?” an angry voice called out from above.
It sounded like Rennly.
What It Sounds Like [?]
Tomrin backed away from the door and looked up. His step-brother bent out a window looking down at him. The low sun struck his forehead and threatened his eyes. 
Tomrin raised his voice. “It’s time for our bout,” he said.
“No,” Renny called down. “You are too late.” 
“The sun still shines. That’s what the contract says.” Tomrin looked around for anyone to prove him wrong, to say this once was a lie too and not finally the truth.
“That’s not what I mean. I can’t now. Look,” Rennly said. “Come back next week. You had to show up earlier.” 
“Next week? I pick the night!” Tomrin said. “Me.” 
“But, I can’t now. I’m the only one here,” Rennly said, he said something else, but much more quietly. It sounded like he was saying something like: the vault was unguarded. 
“Then you forfeit,” Tomrin said. “The letter of our contract is fulfilled. Ah ha! I have bested you and you know it.”
“Not fulfilled!” Rennly snarled, slapping at something behind him. “It is not fulfilled,” he added, turning back to Tomrin. “Not without a fight.”
“Right, and I win right now,” Tomrin added. “If you don’t face me. Check the words in the contract. The bout happens and has a winner. Look around you. If I walk away and say I beat you, no one will question it. But everyone knows that you fight how you do and how you would have to punch yourself several times repeatedly in different awkward spots. No one would believe it. But you say come back tomorrow and what are we? You think we are brothers in the eyes of the contract? No. You forfeit and I will claim I beat you because after training I was so much better than you that I was able to best you without even wounding a single hair on your head, only your feathered pride. That is the intent, Rennly!”
“Not the intent,” Rennly whined. “The intent was to have our little bouts.” 
“Why do you think I changed the words at the last second? It’s so I control the when? I am the master of the when! Fight me now or you lose. That is the intent!”
Pluralism [?]
Tomrin lied most of his words, but it was luck now finally playing to his favor.
Fe savored the look on Rennly’s face. Finally his half-brother was getting a little of his own back. “Stay there,” Rennly shouted. “There is no forfeit!” His head retreated back through the window, and the glass and curtains closed.
The dried, tawny colored lawn Tomrin stood on would serve well for their ring. It seemed—for all their powers—the god still refused to control the weather, or the lives of men, despite how they tried. Lies and bonding, gold and greed. Fear and doubt. Time and space. Who can say what is real?
As he waited he felt nothing but the bump of the dirt as he scratched out a ring. No anticipation, no rush, just the same washed out emptiness as when he’d exited the well earlier that morning. When he finished, he stood in the circle, his back to the sun, and his body casting a naked shadow on the temple’s door.
Slowly, Tomrin’s thoughts became as many as the sun’s rays.
Trust or Not [?]
The door opened and Rennly appeared.
He did not have his staff. “Get in here,” he said, impatient, maybe even a little afraid, his eyes darting.
“I made a ring out here,” Tomrin said. “Did you bring your staff?”
 “I’m not supposed to leave her.” 
“Her?” Tomrin said.  He did not want to go inside. He had not stepped inside the Menad temple in years, and didn’t like the idea of being trapped inside now with Rennly.
“We found her today. And this is terrible timing,” Rennly said. “Now get inside. I can’t leave her for a minute.”
Rennly held the door open for him and Tomrin stepped from the ring and five steps to the temple door. “I see no reason we can’t fight inside,” he said as he stepped through the doorway. He just hoped he judged Rennly correctly and that he wasn’t a rabid animal that would end up having to be put down. 
His brother closed the door and it took a second for Tomrin’s eyes to adjust to the dim lamplight. “You thought my baton, against you with that stick?” Rennly said. “And you aren’t even going to probe if I’m trying to kill you?”
“What about the stick?” Tomrin replied. “And are you aren’t going to kill me?”
“Nothing about the stick,” Rennly said and locked the door. “But you won’t believe the day I’m having—because of you. So it would make sense if I was.”
“Because of me?” Tomrin said. “Nice that you feel the need to don’t mince words.”
“Me? You! It’s because you and your late tail feathers. You had to wait until the last feathered minute. Didn’t you?”
“I set the time,” Tomrin reminded him. 
Rennly only scoffed. “This way.” 
Ascent [?]
Rennly led Tomrin through a corridor in the back of the temple where the walls hung with tapestries and held alcoves with statues of different gods painted and lacquered and lamps made of beaten gold. The hallway was tall and wide enough for a Serath to walk. “What exactly did you do today, that you finaly come here with a dirty shirt and a cripples’ stick?” Rennly said.
“Umm,” Tomrin stuttered. “I’ve been busy.”
“You think you’ve been busy? We found this new Daughter, but not only that. A man, think of it! Apparently he’s burning up the countryside. Someone else is going to get all the glory of catching him I because of you.  Can you believe it? It’s like he thinks he’s the Lightshy Crow or something.” Rennly brought stopped at a door, then turning a key stopped into a rampway which led up as it wound around the temple. “And because of you, I stayed back when everyone else left,” he said when they reached a new doors but kept walking.
“I thought you were afraid of the Corvine Man,” Tomrin said. 
Rennly spoke as he tapped each door. “This man is hardly the Lightshy Crow,” he said. “The Lightshy Crow is a fairy-tale your mother told to scare us.” 
“What about the crazy woman in the mountains?” Tomrin asked. 
“That was just a story I told to scare you,” Rennly said, pointedly. “You should have seen your face. I thought you were going to swallow your tongue.” 
His brother chatted easily, and when he was like this Tomrin could imagine enjoying being around him, but Tomrin feared it would not last. The dark steak and no answer to his question of wanting to kill him left a wedge of suspicion in his mind.
“You know we don’t have to fight,” Tomrin said after a moment of quiet, only broken by the cluck, cluck of his walking stick striking the wooden ramp. 
“Turning coward now?” Rennly taunted. 
“It’s not that,” Tomrin said. “We both want the glass shop to succeed don’t we.”
“You think I am going to accept a draw?”
Tomrin grew frustrated. Rennly was being intentionally difficult. “You think beating me will change anything?” 
“Yes. It will make me feel better,” Rennly said at the smallest door they’d come to. “Stop here.”
Onwards [?]
The higher they climbed the smaller the doors and rooms became. 
Rennly turned the handle. “Wait for me,” he said and bowed to enter. “I need to check on her.” 
The door shut, but not before a slurred voice, that of a girl’s, commanded drunkenly: “Get out!” So lucky as to be cursed with the gift, whoever this woman was, she clearly didn’t find Rennly charming.
After a minute, the door opened and Rennly slipped out, straightening his hair. 
His face grew calm, and a smile formed on it, almost as if suddenly painted on, a mask covering up an inner rage. Rennly’s eyes, however, never changed. “Let’s get on with this,” he said.
“Who was that?” Tomrin asked, no longer just worried for his own life. Now when the time came he tried to think about the location of this room in the spiral they were taking to the top.
“Don’t concern yourself with her,” Rennly said. “She’s still impure, but the gods will see to cleansing her spirit of its infernal taint. Now I think we have a contract to fulfill.” A line of blood on Rennly’s neck formed a rill where he’d been scratched. “Come,” he added harshly.
The ramp turned and came to a flat area, outside, but was decorated with heavy fabric. This was the balcony level. Shooting up through the decking, pillars of wood held up the roof. The whole level was made of carved wood. The pillars, the walls, the ceiling, even the ladder leading to the roof had been worked by a carpenter’s chisel. Tomrin thought he recognized the work. This was perhaps some of his father’s earliest carvings. Only the floor and one item on it remained untouched. The item, gray wood twisted, looked like some contraption.
“The temple’s perch?” 
“We will stay away from it,” Rennly said. “We’ll have our match under the red carpet since we’ll not likely have the chance again.”
Tomrin followed him. “True. Our first rematch will be our last.” 
“So confident you can beat me?” Rennly said and opened one of the carved panels and revealed a small closet. “And not afraid I will try to kill you?”
“The thing is, Rennly,” Tomrin said. “I have adjusted for you, but that doesn’t mean I am any less prepared to take a hit, if that is what it takes.”
Rennly made a face and frowned.
To Doom [?]
The sun streamed in across the temple from the western balcony. “I’m sure we can see about that,” Rennly said as he grabbed a pair of staves from inside a side drawer and walked over. He tried to hand Tormin one of the staves. 
Tomrin brandished his own myrrh walking stick. “I brought my own.”
Rennly scoffed. “That piece of junk?” He dropped the second staff and kicked it back towards the ramp. “Of course you were serious,” he muttered.
“I don’t know how much more serious I could be other than to tell you that if you ever do go see an old crone and live to tell tales about it afterwards and they are true, she is long gone,” Tomrin said as he stepped back and took up a stance. “As to the staff? It’s come in useful once or twice today already.”
Rennly raised an eyebrow. “Really?” He asked as his Orioles spots made him look like an animal of some kind
Tomrin nodded. “And win or lose, I’m leaving Menad.”
Rennly grinned. “You think you can just disappear now?” His grin turned to a snarl as he took a fighting stance.
“Not because of you,” Tomrin said. “But since I can’t make you see reason, let’s begin.” Tomin shifted his weight on his staff as he pretended to glance towards the light of the setting sun. “But before we do, you should know that even if you do win, it will change nothing between you and me because I am leaving either way.” 
Rennly pointed to his golden feather badge. “You can’t leave without my say-so.”
Tormin stared into Rennly’s straight green eyes. He saw his brother now more clearly now than he ever had before. “You stole Gaz away from me simply because he was my friend?” Tomrin said and hobbled with his stick as he play-danced to give himself better striking room.
“Friend?” Rennly scoffed. “You don’t know anything do you?”
Tomrin saluted with his walking stick. “I know so little it hurts some times?” 
Rennly did not return the salute. He attacked, swinging his staff. Tomrin parried. Clatch. He countered with his stick. 
His stick was shorter but he could strike at Rennly like an asp with it. 
Rennly grunned. He could see it now too. The pain helped his eyes tell the story as he made several feints. “You’re fast,” he said, “But I am stronger.” 
“But you are only going to wear yourself out,” Tomrin said. 
Rennly swung down with his staff. “I’m not fat like you.”
He caught another swing as he danced out of its way. The crook cradled Rennly’s staff and the walking stick struck Rennly in the chest, a tap with the tip of the haft, the second point. 
“Fat? Can’t you see it, Rennly?” Tomrin asked.
Rennly extracted his staff. “See what?”
“If that is all the better you have, you should forfeit now,” he said and feinted. “We’re not children anymore.”
 Rennly fell for the move and swung high to block, hoping to make a counter to Tomrin’s. Tomrin ducked under the swing and with the crook of his stick snagged Rennly leg. Rennly’s unblocked swing had overbalanced him. Now the leg held all his weight. Tomrin tugged sharply with his walking stick. Rennly fell to the deck. Whump. 
“Maybe,” Rennly said as he scrambled back to his feet. “But it seems we still play dirty.”
“Dirty?” Tomrin laughed. “I think that still counts as the third point.” 
Rennly jabbed his staff at Tormin. 
Using his stick to sidestep, Tomrin pushed the staff to the side and struck an easy fourth point, then struck a fifth when Rennly feinted and Tomrin counter-feinted while pretending to attempt a counter. Instead he blocked Rennly low swipe then struck Rennly’s foreleg. That scored a grunt and Tomrin let Rennly rub his leg.
“Maybe you have some finesse,” Rennly said when he balanced his staff on one open palm. “More than me, but I have power.”
“Finess always beats power,” Tomrin said.
“We will see about that.”
Rennly’s next few swings lost all elegance, all veneer of skill or refinement. Clack! Clack! Clack! The blows sent vibrations and numbness into Tomrin’s hands and Tomrin feared his walking stick would break from the blows as Rennly’s own had in their prior bout. “It’s like you are trying to hammer in nails with a sledge. This is supposed to be a civilized fight or not?” he asked his brother.
“I’m not the one who grew up with animals,” Rennly said as he took a breath and paused his wild attacks. During them Tomrin had only been able to score a single additional point. Six. He was beginning to feel tired now and hoped Rennly was too, but doubted his step-brother had woken up exhausted. 
Running across the fields, and walking so many miles out of the Lower Steppes had drained him, and he spoke to gain a second more breathing room. “You have yet to score a single point, and I only need four to win, to turn you into a skunk.”
“Skunk me? That must be a pleasant thought for you,” Rennly said. “Pleasant for you.”
Tomrin struck him again.
The Count [?]
A massive swing came low at Tomrin’s right leg. Rennly had let the previous point through on purpose, a trade.
“Ah-hah!” Tormin groaned.
“That is going to leave a bruise.” Rennly ginned.
Not holding back his walking stick, Tomrin won the next two points. Cratch, fwap. The myrrh rod struck like a whip. When Rennly tried to repeat his trick from the fair, Tormin was ready for it. After the first counter he whirled out and stuck Rennly low in the ankle. 
“You learn fast,” Rennly said. “But will that be enough?”
“I’m winning fast enough.” 
“But you are getting slower,” Rennly said. “I’m not even breaking a sweat.” It was true. Sweat welled out of Tomrin. It burned his chest where it soaked into his cauterized wound. “And while you’ve been practicing, do you think I have been just goofing off?” Rennly said and again changed his style, his stance looser, not meant for raw power. His staff was like a chameleon’s tongue striking out at a fly. Clack, clack. Clack, clack. Tomrin fell back from the barrage. 
Rennly’s staff was inherently longer and he had newfound speed. 
He might actually win.
Descent into Madness [?]
Circling, they moved away from the hidden closet, spiraling outwards.
The sweat running from his forehead, he dared not brush away. He had no time. Tomrin dared not even blink. The clack of staves continued as they circled and Rennly swatted at him. I just need to bide my time. The sun was low enough to stab Rennly in the eye. I just need that second. A heartbeat of distraction would be all it would offer. Tormin committed to taking advantage of it. It was dirty, but he had come to win, and Rennly didn’t seem to tire even as he swung again and again. High, low, it didn’t matter; his step-brother was in far better shape. 
It seemed like forever, like the sun would set first, but finally Rennly squinted. Tomrin’s feint was already trafficking through the air, stabbing at him, another trick to disjar Rennly from his barrage of snappy attacks. 
Rennly jerked his head, and Tomrin shifted on his feet, and rapped his step-brother on his shoulder. “Seven, one,” Tomrin said.
“The sun was in my eye,” Rennly squawked. “That’s the only reason.” He swung.
“Oh, was it?” Tomrin asked as he blocked a jarring blow. “That’s part of the game,” he added. Part of the game—same as Rennly’s shifting style was part of the game. His brother was back to power. Tomrin scored another hit, but pulled the strike. Control was important as well. He didn’t want to feel the massive strike Rennly’s blows promised if he lost that. “Just three more now,” Tomrin said, quickly removing sweat from his brow, taking advantage of the lull.
The sunset and dusk offered a quick advantage. Rennly wasn’t even trying to win anymore. He was just going through the notions. A quick jab after blocking one of Rennly’s wild body swings and the score tipped, nine to one. 
“It’s too bad this is our final bout,” Rennly said as their eyes finally adjusted. “I … just… don’t want it to end.”
A Sun Sets [?]
The twilight seemed to drag for hours, but somewhere within it Tomrin landed the penultimate strike. 
Ten-one. A strange feeling of floating washed over him again, if not quite so strongly. He was about to win. He could taste it. Winning would mean this charade would be over. 
“It was a good fight,” Tomrin said magnanimously. “Invigorating,” he added. Exhaustion tugged at his arms and legs. “After today he was going to sleep for a week. If I never wake up again I will be happy. After today,” he said. “We both can live free of whatever it was between us. We can live now as our own men, not as Dable Ocrin’s misbegotten sons.” 
“Rousing speech,” Rennly said and lashed out.
Tomrin caught it with his staff and locked it. “I think you see now part of the reason for my confidence.”
“Are you trying to patronize me?” Renny said, pulling back with a force to unlock their weapons, whirling and swinging madly. Swoosh. 
Tomrin ducke. “Not at all. I am just trying to say how nice it will be once things go back to normal.” 
“Normal?” Rennly said. Clack, clack. 
“Yes,” Tomrin said. “Life under the contract gives you plenty of the Glasswork’s profits.” 
The twilight faded and their weapons became silhouettes. 
“Sure,” Rennly said and feinted. He’d done a similar move before in their bout at the fair. 
Tomrin pretended to be taken in and dropped to his knees before the return. He swung his walking stick across Rennly’s thigh. Fap. Eleven, one. He breached the ten point spread. “Now, I must go.”
“And where do you have to be off to soo fast?” Rennly asked. “In such a rush?”
“Here it comes,” Tomrin muttered to himself. “Places,” he said, resting his body on his staff. He could hardly say he needed to catch up with Margretta and Marten so they could run off because he had the Leviathan’s Mark on his chest. 
“What places?”
“New places.”
Chapter 27: The Horror of Fire
	If the gods are so powerful why have they not found me yet?
		—Words scrawled in the margins of Cologon’s Living Book of the Dead

Thought ceased and Tomrin moved by reflex as his muscles tensed themselves and his fingers squeezed his walking stick as he moved it up to block Rennly’s swinging staff. His wrists were at a poor angle as the staff slid through the air, a gray form barely visible. Cathawuck! The walking stick blocked the staff but not completely, not enough to stall it completely before striking Tomrin across the cheek and ear. White points of jagged light filled his vision. “Feathers,” he swore and his instincts took over.
Suddenly, he found himself on his feet, pushing his walking stick so as to catch another of Rennly’s swings. “So this was you all along?” 
“Me?” Rennly spat. 
He began raining down towering blows, pushing Tomrin back. The vibrations of the walking stick rattled all the way down his arms up to his teeth. In the darkness each wild swing was a potential break or fracture. His walking stick couldn’t hold up much longer. The world, more particularly Rennly, had gone mad. His ears buzzed and his cheek burned as if stabbed with red hot glass where that staff hit him.
“Stop this Rennly! Relent and I will let you live!” he shouted as he began to circle. Clack. Clack. He focused on parrying. He couldn’t see for a tinker’s tail feathers.” The balcony, he thought, and fell back under Rennly’s blows, dragging Rennly with him. 
“Let me live?” Rennly laughed. “If this has to be our last fight,” he said as he swung across his body. “Let’s make it a good one!” 
“You aren’t even listening to me!” Tomrin shouted at him. “You’ve had your chance for a good fight.” His feet stepped into a pool of starlight. He backed out into the balcony, into the full light of night.
Rennly followed Tomrin out onto the balcony. “I bet now you wished you had availed yourself of the staff I offered you.” Behind Rennly Tomrin could see the Perch. It seemed for a second that his brother had sat up on it and that he just dismounted it from the shadow as he entered the balcony. “Your problem,” Rennly continued. “You think you are the best at everything.”
Tomrin held his tongue and they circled the balcony until over the low railing the Hall of Victory gleamed against the valley. The houses slept and the stores waited for the morning. 
Rennly swung again and again like a lunatic, crashing his staff against Tomrin’s walking stick, trying to break it as if it were inferior.
The Long Tradition [?]
“There it is!” Rennly said in their weapon clatter. “Everything comes too easy for you Peregrine.”
“Easy?” Tomrin asked, surprised by the verbal attack. “I worked hard to become good at glass. What have you done? Martial training? And yet you can’t even beat me at a child’s game of sticks.”
“Easy for you, a Peregrine slave boy! No responsibility.”
“I’m here aren’t I,” Tomrin growled.
“Look at you! Always judging. It’s easy for you to look good. As a Peregrin half-breed no one expects anything of you. You dress yourself, show up to work, and do half a day’s work, then go home and people sing your praises. I have to work for everything I have! Everyone expects more of me!”
A swing went through and struck Tomrin in the belly, but he had tensed. He swung himself and connected his walking stick with Rennly’s face. The blow stunned his half-brother, and he blinked in confusion. 
“You are envious of me,” Tomrin said. “Aren’t you?”
“What?” Rennly demanded. “No, I am not.”
“If you could see your face right when I struck you, you would know that you should stop,” Tomrin said. “We’ve both had our fun—we’ve each had our say. So now we are done playing. I have to go.”
Rennly lunged at him.
Tomrin side stepped but his foot caught on the railing as he tried to move. Rennly, changed directions and plowed into him, his staff across his body. He pushed the staff and himself onto Tomrin’s chest and onto the crook of the walking stick, trapping it. 
A flood of vertigo washed over Tomrin as Rennly pushed him back over the railing. “It is a long way down,” Rennly sneered. “When you measure yourself against me, now don’t you think?”
Jerking his head as if to headbutt Rennly, Tomrin looped both his feet around the pillars of the railing, the only reason Rennly couldn’t push him completely over to fall on the sun baked ground below. “I don’t measure myself against you, Rennly. I don’t even think about you.”
“I think about you all the time!” Rennly roared.
“Why?” Tomrin said. His back was going to break, arched as it was—or the railing would. “It’s been years since you left Woolad.”
A Spirit of Time [?]
Rennly roared. “Ahieeaahh!” 
It was some terrible beastal roar of an animal in pain, wild and mindless. As he roared, his muscles shook and Tomrin could feel the raw power in his half-brother coming to the fore, but behind him—what seemed like a phantom appeared—holding the discarded staff. 
She walked out into the moonlight, her naked feet padding drunkenly on the wooden balcony decking. Tomrin felt befuddled. He knew the girl. The judge’s daughter’s dress was ripped. “Elisah,” he breathed her name as it finally came to mind. She looked wild-eyed, like she had seen a ghost, even as she seemed a ghost herself. Tomrin couldn’t understand. What was she doing here? Of all people, and her looking like this waif?
She screamed and swung the staff in her hands. “Yuah!” It was an artless swing but the staff clobbered Rennly on the back of the head. Cluth. The blow stunned him a second.
Tomrin pushed off the railing, and Rennly stumbled backwards. His brother spun, and with the back of his hand he slapped Elisah hard across the face. She tumbled and hit her head hard on the wooden decking with her fall. Krath.
Free of Rennly’s weight Tomrin swung his walking stick at Rennly while he was turned away, striking him in the neck with the crook. Rennly staggered and dropped his staff. “What the feathers are you doing, man?” Tomrin asked him. “She’s a girl.” 
Rennly’s hand went to his neck where Tomrin had hit him. It was the same spot where the new Daughter had scratched him. Rennly spoke but Tomrin understood in a flash without needing to hear it from Rennly. “She’s nothing but an unclean gossling awaiting transport.”
“I know her,” Tomrin said. “She’s a good person.” He stepped forward, but Rennly blocked his way. Tomrin raised his walking stick. “Get out of my way, Rennly. I think you killed her.” 
“That would be no great loss.The gods have plenty of Daughters,” Rennly said. “But you aren’t even supposed to be here. Let alone see her.”
“What did you do to her?” Tomrin asked. “She looks afright.” 
“I didn’t don’t do anything,” Rennly said. 
“That’s a lie. Her dress didn’t rip itself!” 
Revelations [?]
“If you must know...” Rennly said, waving his hands. He didn’t complete his sentence but leaped at Tomrin. He moved so quickly Tomrin didn’t have time to stop him. Rennly’s left hand grabbed Tormin by the nape of the shirt and spun him as his shirt ripped open. Rennly’s eyes went wide. “What the feathers?” Rennly let go and grabbed at the baton at his hip. 
Tomrin swatted his wrist, preemptively blocking Rennly’s attempt to use the device and it clattered away. “Why did you do that?” Tomrin demanded, stating stupidly as his own chest.
“You!” Rennly shouted, pointing at Tomrin’s scales. His eyes met Tomrin’s. “You! You are him.” 
“Yes, I’m him,” Tomrin said. “And now don’t you see what a fool you’ve been trying to kill me. You can’t kill me. Only I can me. And you. But I don’t have to. You could come with me.” 
“Come with you?” Rennly asked. “You came here for the girl?” 
“No, I came for our contract,” Tomrin said. 
Rennly stepped back and eyed the girl. “I need you to drop your staff.”
It was as if sudden sanity had overtaken his madness and Tomrin laughed. “Me? I’m not going to drop my walking stick. Think, Rennly. Think! How you’ve been acting. You aren’t thinking straight.” 
“I’m thinking straight now,” Rennly said, swallowing. “I’m interdicting you.” 
“Hear yourself, Rennly,’’ Tomrin said. “I have set fires. I have banished my family to the desert. I have come here through imprisonment. I have stared demons in the face. Do you think I am going to submit to you? Not even with a please and thank you?”
“Demons?” Rennly asked, his cold green eyes glancing around warily.
“Now sadly you have to come with us.”
“Us?” Rennly asked. “You are with her, now?”
“I can’t let them have her, not now.” Rennly reached for his sheathed knife.
“Don’t do it, Rennly!” Tomrin pointed his walking stick at his step-brother. “Don’t make me kill you.”
“Kill me?” Rennly said, pausing his hand. “You kill me and you kill Godly Glassworks.” 
“No, it will survive your death. If I kill you, you’ll be dead. Everyone will assume something happened. An accident, perhaps.” 
“They might, sure,” Rennly replied. “But don’t think I’m so foolish. I remade my will while you were off training. If anything happens to me now, the glass shop will be censored.” 
“No...” 
“Ah! You see it. This is the best! Kill me and kill your darling glass shop. So now you have to submit and undergo purification if that’s really is all you care about.” Rennly laughed and Tomrin shook his walking stick at him. The Luster, however, evaded him. 
Even if he wanted to, Tomrin could not make good his threat. 
Final Partings [?]
“Fine, Rennly, you win,” Tomrin said. “And yet...?”
“Of course I win,” Rennly said. “And yet. I still have yet to kill the girl.”
“What?” 
 Rennly pulled out his knife and stepped over the sleeping form of Elisah. Her chest rose and fell with her breathing. Rennly knelt down over her.
“No!” Tomrin roared as he brought back up his weapon. A fury gripped him—and a calm. He was willing to sacrifice himself for the glass shop, but why this girl? “Why her?” Tomrin demanded as Rennly looked at him. 
“Think of it as your first step,” Rennly said. 
“You would never get away with killing a Daughter.”
“I always get away with everything,” Rennly said. “It’s my charm. And she’s not a Daughter yet.”
“Rennly—brother, think,” Tomrin said, his anger returning.
Rennly laughed. “What is that even supposed to mean?”
“You can’t kill her and get away with it.” 
“Of course I can.”
A sinking lightness filled Tomrin’s stomach as the Luster called to him. “What have you done?” Tomrin asked. “You haven’t rigged it have you?”
“Rigged?” Rennly asked. “No. I am not your dead boss.”
No, Rennly [?]
“You think I killed your father so you want to kill me,” Tomrin said.
Rennly sat back on his heels. The knife lowered but also dropped to the side of Elysah’s throat. “I don’t think about that. I was the who killed Davot.”
“Why?”
Rennly smiled. “When I learned he wasn’t my real father.”
“You?” Tomrin asked. “I knew you were insane. But? I told Hadras. Or do you think I am stupid? We have other brothers or did you forget that?”
“Like Gaz?”
“Gaz?”
“He had our father’s eyes,” Rennly said. “As do all his children.”
Fast [?]
Tomrin saw it now clearly. Rennly was a scorpion. His knife was his stinger and he loomed now over Elisah’s limp body confident in his prey like the animal he was killing was to him. The thought of having to stop him, to lower himself to a level of beast, made Tomrin feel sick. “I think I am going to be sick, Rennly, if you move another inch,” he said. “My parents know what I am. Emy knows. Hadras knows. They know who and what I am. They could not keep me prisoner, as pious as they are. I left them the desert overawed with the fire from the Wellspring of my own damnation. Think! Around me now, you can can kill no more men, women, or children, not this girl, not now, not ever. No more so than I am a prisoner either. I don’t care what righteous god you serve, I am going now with the girl, one choice remains and that is to go with me. So this is your last warning.”
“Warning?” Rennly raised the knife to throw.
“Toss the knife off to the side, Rennly,” Tomrin said, his voice cleared of all emotion. The Luster was as nothing. It spoke for Rennly and the Rennly’s of the world. Tomrin raised his own voice to be heard in its face. “I will not say it again.” 
Rennly wavered. “What are you saying?” 
Tomrin dissolved and the Corvine Man resolved to end it. “I will not found shops and houses.” His words became a tumble. “Don’t you see it, brother? Come!” He reached out his other hand to Rennly. Join with me now and live; cross into history with me.”
“Join you? Never,” Rennly sneered and arched back his wrist with the knife as he stood. “I will see you dead first! And Seasargus will reward me.” 
He winged the knife.
The Will [?]
The Corvine Man was casting. Willvane wrapped the shadows and the ice. The three powers vanished, leaving sunfire, burning through his veins. He cast the fiery ambrosia out by pushing it into the walking stick. As he pointed with one hand, holding it by the double crook, the length of the stick shot brightness on Rennly’s chest.
As the knife spun through the air, Tomrin pulled back his other hand as hard as he could, jerking as if his hand were on fire with deadly flames reaching for him and every point as wicked fire filled the walking stick, and so much more still left over inside Tomrin and the stick, all yearning to be free. Fire bloomed in all directions down the cracks of the bark, then a fire bolt shot down the length of the gnarled branch and burst out the butt in a swirl of yellow and gold. The knife glinted and was engulfed in catastrophic fire which burned and roared like a lit glassworking torch, and like a fist of swirling flames it punching Rennly in the chest, carrying the knife with it. Frawh! 
The excess fire in the air pounced on him and pushed him backwards and frothed, splashing on the wooden floor near Elisah. The blade in Rennly’s chest, stabbed inside the wound as it burned a shocked expression onto his face. 
Then it was only cruel flames which lit up his gastly face, not life.
Fire [?]
Tomrin tossed the remnants of the flaming stick in his hand aside and rushed over where Rennly teetered on his knees over Elisha. Tomrin pushed him backwards to keep him from spreading flames to the girl. “I can’t believe... Elisah Reydal.”
Ridding himself of the rest of the sunfire, he pushed it into Rennly, and with strength of will alone, he held the fire inside his dead stepbrother’s body as he grabbed Elisah by the wrists and dragged her off the balcony into the shadows.
Once her hands slipped through his, Tomrin fell to his knees. He was using all his strength to hold the fire in, and the farther he was from Rennly the harder it became. The fire was beginning to leach out. Tomrin stared into the Wellspring in horror. He’d torn his ward, but he had no time for that. The fire was leaking into the air but also into the wooden balcony’s decking. Fire now soaked into the wooden planks, and crawled up the pillars of the railing and filled them and then skittered under him and Elisah and down into the beams holding up the temple roof. It would burst free and the tower would become an inferno. 
Tomrin pushed his arms under Elisah’s body and legs and picked her up and walked into the darkness as flames began to crackle out of the balcony. The smell of burning chased them into the shadows which flickered like sirens on a distant shore on the twisting wall, a mirage. 
Heat was in the air; too much ambrosia, and all control was fading.
The sunfire began to run ahead of him as the dead weight in his arms rolled back her head. And Looked up and him. “Ahh!”
“Ahh!” he replied and she rolled her drunken head back over.
Everything was coming apart. By the time he made it to the ramps the planks ahead were filled with fire he was holding down with will alone as his arms and legs did the work
Robles did the same for Master Laz…
And still not save him!
The Holies [?]
Elisah finally opened her eyes and looked at him more than a second as he marched awkwardly down the ramp with her.
Behind him the fire roared. He had maybe two levels left to go.
The walls themselves were smoking now and tiny flames came alive as Elisah spoke. “Tomrin Ocrin?” 
“Can you walk,” he asked her, but her head rolled back again. 
You need to let her go, a voice inside his head told him. She was too heavy. His steps were too slow. Like this, they were both going to die. Save yourself! The smoke now choked his breath. Tomrin had heard this voice before, the first time when he had tried to save Rennly’s father. That time he had obeyed. Now he yelled at it. “No! Not her too!” He stumbled on through the blinding smoke and flames. Not her! Not her! Over and over he said it as he descended through the fire. At last he reached the stone of the temple proper. His breathing turned slowed in the cool air. He let himself drop down to his knees and laid Elisah out on the flat stones. 
“Not her?” she asked, opening her eyes once more. Tomrin realized he was still repeating his mantra.
“Nothing,” he said. “You’re alive.” 
Elisah flopped her arms and let them lie on the stone. The fire burned in the rafters above them. “My head hurts,” she said.
“But can you walk?” Tomrin asked. “This place is coming down.” 
“I don’t know,” she said.
Tomrin helped her to her feet and she leaned on him as they moved down the stone ramp to the ground floor. They exited the back into the front of the temple. While it was lit by lamps in the back, here the stars and moonlght shone through the cut glass windows. 
“I need a rest,” Elisah said and Tomrin sat her in the pews facing the altar.
“Stay here,” he said. He hurried to the front door. It was still locked. He pulled the handle, but it was futile. The large door budged not an inch. Tomrin hurried back down the aisle. “It’s locked. I’m going to go try the others.”
“I’m coming with you,” Elisah said, standing. She wobbled like she had been drinking high spirit tarsk all day. Tomrin put out a hand to catch her. She pulled back and nearly fell. “I’m fine. Let’s go.” She held her torn dress while they walked past the altar into the temple holies. 
Final Escape [?]
The fire pulled air in from the cracks like a chimney fire. As soon as they opened any door the temple would burn and the wood walls would collapse and fall into the stones and burn like a fire pit, if the trestling didn’t collapse first. Elisah seemed apprehensive at the howl of the wind through the first door which grew louder as they approached. “It’s just the stove wind,” Tomrin said. 
“I’m not afraid of banshees,” Elisah replied. 
Tomrin thought of Margretta—and her threat to kill him. “Me either,” he said. The wind squalled through the crack of the door, but it was locked and Tomrin felt certain Rennly had the key. “Too late now to go back and get the key from my brother.” 
“He’s your brother?” 
“Half-brother,” Tomrin said, “It’s a long story. Don’t worry, I’m nothing like him. He did all of this?” he added motioning to her torn dress. 
“Maybe we can reminisce when we are out of here, I think the temple is about to collapse.” She didn’t look like the girl he’d just saved from death, a death his carelessness made possible. She seemed willing to take charge. “All the other doors will be locked. I thought you knew this one was open.” 
“Well—ah,” Tomrin stammered. “I had hoped.” 
“Great, so we burn to death?” she said. “You brother was crazy setting the temple on fire. Probably the worst censor in history.”
“Actually, I, uh...”
“What?”
“I was the one who set the temple on fire. It was an accident,” he added when she gave him a withering look. 
“Fires this large aren’t accidents,” Elisah said. “Are you an arsonist or something?”
Tomrin reflected on the wind break he had burned, acres of trees destroyed in one afternoon. “No,” he replied. “I’m not setting fires for fun.” 
“So you didn’t get his key before you started all this?”
“No. I didn’t”
She frowned. “So now what?” 
The Last Door [?]
“Well, I guess—step back,” Tomrin said. He put his hand on the wooden door. It wasn’t like his walking stick and he figured this was going to hurt. He would need to be careful. 
Elisah took a step back and Tomrin tried to feel the Luster. He closed his eyes.
“What are you doing?” she asked him. 
Tomrin squeezed tight his eyes. “Rah!” he growled, but the Luster evaded him. He pulled back from the door. “You try it.” 
“Try it?” Elisah asked. “Try what?” 
“Aren’t you a Daughter?” Tomrin said. “Can’t you see the ambrosia in the Wellspring?” 
“Ambrosia? Well, yes, no, but…” Elisah said. “What does that have to do with anything?” 
“Use the sunfire, or ice, I don’t know. It’s easier for a girl.” 
Elisah pulled herself up. “I am a woman.” 
“Just try it,” Tomrin said, not knowing if he should apologize. Talking to her was like standing on an anthill.
She walked to the door. “Sunfire?” 
“Yes,” Tomrin replied. “Just pull it in. You can see the four ambrosia?” 
“I can’t see anything,” She pulled back from the door. 
“You are a Daughter?” 
“They gave me something. I can’t remember. My mind is fuzzy.” 
“Really? You didn’t even try.” 
“You don’t know anything,” Elisah snapped. “Now, you got me killed.” 
“I saved you,” Tomrin said, growing angry. He was afraid now that he and she would die here after all. “Stand back,” he commanded her as the Luster gripped him. 
A bit of wood would not stand between him and life and freedom. No, he was the Corvine Man, the bugbear of legend, the cloud to blight the sun. He was both the monster and the myth, heaven’s destruction. He was the end to the Serath Dominion, and when he drank a sip of ambrosia, it was the tiniest of tiniest. Arsonist!
The willvane swiftly tangled with him like a thing alive, an animal with its back to the wall. He wrestled with it as he held his hand to the door. Sunfire burned within him promising untold glories. The glacier ice froze him to the quick while the darklight rotted all, corroded all—and it was magnificent! He had nothing left to lose but life, hope, and love. Almost nothing at all!
He wove the willvane, netting and capturing the glacier ice and darklight in its web. The sunfire he saved for last as it threatened to boil him down to a charcoaled corpse. He thrust out his other hand and pushed the fire into the planks of the door, burning his palms as the fire scorched out of him. “Aahh!” The pain was nothing but a sharp light in his head. He pushed away and closed himself off to the ambrosia as the Luster fled. 
“Get back! Get back!” he shouted, running as he held the raw sunfire inside the wood of the door by strength of will. 
“Why?” Eisah demanded as he grabbed her and pulled her down the passage. She pulled free of him and turned to stare at the door. It only looked different if you could see the change in the ambrosia. “Nothing is happening,” she said. 
Her words crumbled Tomrin’s control over the sunfire. The door exploded in a rain of flame and wood. Skrootch!
Air rushed into the passage and the stove wind blew bits of flaming char at them. Tomrin shielded his eyes with this arm. The fire was normal, hot, but natural. “We are free,” he said, turning to Elisah.
She seemed agast what she saw. “Who are you, Tomrin Ocrin?” she asked, her voice a horrified whisper. 
“I don’t know,” he replied softly. A splinter on the floor burned the carpet near his left foot. He gently tapped the flame out with a toe. “Yet sometimes I fear I might be the Lightshy Crow.”
Chapter 28: From the Ashes
	I died long ago when I realized I never truly lived.
		—From Cologon’s Living Book of the Dead

Elisah touched his shoulder and Tomrin turned as she pulled him around to face her. Her eyes, however, were not on his face. She stared instead at the scales on his chest, seeing them for the first time. Her shock and surprise lit up her face at what she saw. The burn still stung from the night before and the tiny regrowing scales glinted red. How she had missed the Mark before was forgivable in his mind. The fire above was still burning. “Hotter now than ever!” Tomrin said as the stove winds rushed by, bellows worth, like bottled air he used at the glass shop. “We need to get out of here before the dressing falls in and traps us inside a sea of flame.”
Elisah voiced something that sounded like a question, but Tomrin could not hear it over the fire’s quickening roar. The winds were picking up. She put a freezing finger on the ring of the scales. It tickled something fierce, like a knife and feather. 
He grabbed her arm by the wrist. “We need to run for it!” he yelled. The bits of burning door were burning sideways at them from the inrushing wind. “Follow me!” But he didn’t give her any choice; he kept hold of her and dragged her towards the open night. Cool air rushed by, waiting for them outside. 
Tomrin kicked the burning splinters of what was left of the door out of the way. The sunfire was gone, but the heat of its passage had shattered the door to burning pieces. A dark shape appeared outside. For a second Tomin’s heart raced. Censors. Tomrin recognized the man, however, and the woman who had come with him.
“Tomrin Ocrin,” Marten said.
“Marten,” Tomrin said as he exited with Elisah in tow. “Margretta.” The woman wore a sour expression on her face. “I believe you both know the judge’s daughter, Elisah Reydal,” he added.
“We thought maybe she was the one,” Marten said gravely. He sheathed the black triangular flange of metal he held, sending it to his hip. His great black riding cloak he unhooked as he stepped forward. He swung the sable swath over Elisah. “It’s unfortunate to see you again like this, Recorder Reydal.” 
“Thank you, Counselor,” Elisah replied, wrapping herself like a caterpillar in a cocoon.   Margretta scowled as she looked Tomrin up and down. She moved to grab his ripped shirt, she held it over his Leviathan’s Mark a moment. “Let’s go,” she said, adding: “Was this your idea all along, Master Ocrin?” 
“No,” Tomrin replied. Behind him the section of the temple crashed in with a wrenching sound. Fratchp. He could hear glass breaking, or thought he could. “Rennly—things got out of control—he’s dead.” 
“Have you thought about how you might look in the Wellspring?” Margretta asked coldly. 
“Yes,” Tomrin replied, looking again but widening his view, not focusing only on the ambrosia churning around him to the wider world. To the south he saw two lights. They were still far away. “Daughters?” he said. 
“Two more on top of those already looking for you,” Margretta said. “Now they know you are right here.” She sighed. “But with the feathered temple on fire, they won’t even need to look will they?” 
“Counselor Marten? Lady Margretta?” Elisah said. “You’re—” 
“In a hurry?” Margretta snapped. “Yes, now you hold still,” she said to Tomrin. She put her hands on his shoulders. “I could give you further warnings, but I swear you’ll just do the opposite.” 
“Margretta, we need to go,” Marten said. “Remember, the crowd building out front?” 
“Yes, Marten,” Margretta replied as willvane entered her from the wildly maddened swirling of the four ambersia in the Spring. “Now—” She said but didn’t finish her thought but wove the willvane as she had before, filling Tomrin with the web. “And hippity-hop goes the horsey’s head.”
“What’s she doing?” Eisah asked, but Marten shushed her. “Not now, Recorder Reydal. She needs to concentrate.” 
Finally Margretta completed her spell dance and pulled back. Tomrin could feel the concentration and will she exerted to wrestle such an abundance of the feathery willvane under control welling off her, and though if he felt no different, his footprint in the ambrosia bubbled and disappeared.
“Me with the girl?” Marten said. “Meet at the horses?” 
“Yes,” Margretta replied. She was sweating and she slumped her shoulders as if exhausted by the weaving of the ward. “Someone will find out something happened here.” 
“The two...in the Wellspring?” Marten said.
Margretta raised her eyebrow at the question. “Call no attention to yourselves.” 
“Right,” Marten said. He led Elisah away around the curve of the temple and towards the front. 
“And you remember,” Margetta said to Tomrin. “You tore your night shirt getting out of bed. Now hold it shut.” 
Tomriin did as he was ordered and followed Margretta without prompting. 
Out In Front Of This [?]
In the front, the courtyard was filled with people. 
Lookie-loos always came out when there was a fire of any magnitude and he and Margretta seemed no different than any of them. The fire trucks arriving garnered all eyes. Even still, Tormin found himself holding his breath. He and Rennly had been out fighting on the balcony. Someone could have seen, yet no one stopped them. The fire trucks, however, stopped right in front of them. Margretta moved to push around as the firemen jumped down, the Fire Marshal with them. 
“Master Ocrin,” Tamerton said. “Will you look at this?” The man pointed disapprovingly at the burning Temple. “I don’t know what to make of it.” 
Tomrin stopped. “I know,” he said. To ignore the man would call more attention to himself. The man knew him. “I have no idea how the temple could catch fire.” 
“It’s wood,” the man said. “But here I have less jurisdiction. The Daughters should take care of it. I wonder if they are alright. I feel I need to do something.” 
Tomrin glanced at Margretta. She glared at him to say: “Let’s go. What are you doing?” 
Tomrin grimaced and turned back to the Rubish fireman. “Too bad my friend isn’t here. He’d go in. Me though? I think I’ve had my fill of fire,” he said. “But I better go. I can’t even bear to see it anymore. I don’t know what I was thinking. I should have just stayed in bed.” 
“Me too,” the Marshall mused. 
“Thing is Marshall,” Tomrin said. “If the temple is burning it’s because Daughters want it too. I personally wouldn’t get involved.” 
The Marshall frowned. “I suppose you are right. Thank you, Master Tomrin.” 
Tomrin walked away. Just how the man was in a position of leadership boggled his mind.
 He put the man aside and followed Margretta to the court’s yard and to the stables. They entered through a side door and met Marten and Elisah already inside.
A lamp hanging from the low rafter cast a dull orange glow on them. 
Life of Death [?]
Elisah looked angry. “I demanded to know what is going on!” she said as soon as Margretta opened the door. 
“Hush!” Margretta said sharply as she waved a hand at Tomrin. He shut the door. “We have no time to explain.” 
“I am a judge’s daughter,” Elisah said. “I know a kidnapping when I see it. I was kidnapped once already today. And Tomrin Ocrin, he can do magic, I saw it. Who are you people? Don’t tell me you are a Daughter, lady Margretta.” 
“Let me make this very easy for you, Elisah Reydal. I know very well who you and your father are. But maybe you don’t think I am a lady of title? Maybe I was not born one and had to earn it. Which I did by keeping my mouth shut and doing what had to be done, and by making the hard choices—choices like the one you are about to make now. Trust me and trust this seal—” Margretta pulled a card from her pocket. On it was stamped the image of a peach and some words Tomrin could not read, but he knew the card. “—trust and live.” Margretta handed it to Elisah.
Elisah read aloud. “The bearer of this bond speaks for me, Lord of the Crystal Throne, Champion of the East, and Emperor of Corundum, Jarvis Teabril. Do as they command, and you do as I command. There is a signature.” She squinted at it. 
Margretta snatched the card back and stuffed it into her dress through one of the hip folds into a hidden pocket. “Yes, that is the emperor’s signature,” she said. “Now are you sworn officer of the court here, or not?” Elisah nodded at Margretta. “Good. Later I can tell you more,” Margretta continued. “But for now, all you need to know is that the Emperor needs you to do as I tell you. Or you could choose your second option.” 
“Death?” Elisah asked in a whisper. One of the horses whickered in the silence. “But…”
A Spring Stone [?]
“Think,” Margretta said and pulled her hand from her pocket. 
A small stone sat in her palm. The ambrosia ever so stirred slightly around Tomrin and he realized it was just Margretta channeling sun fire into the stone. It glowed in the Wellspring with a thousand tiny steamers of fiery ambrosia. A ball of flames appeared in the stillness above them, casting light like the noonday sun. “I would make it painless, but you would still be dead.” 
“No,” Tomrin said. “You wouldn’t.” 
Marten put a heavy hand on Tomrin’s shoulder. “You give Elisah Reydal too little credit, Master Tomrin,” he said. “She is as wise as her father. She will choose correctly.” 
His words hung in a growing silence and the horses in their cramped stalls stood quiet.
King’s Gamble, the tallest of the three, glanced from person to person as Elisah considered her options. She looked as sober as her judge father, not the stumbling mess from before. She pulled Marten’s black greatcloak closer around herself and said, “I want to live—but under protest. I would bring this to the Emperor himself if I have to.” 
“Good. This way you may have that chance,” Margretta said.
“Then what?”
“We only have three horses,” Marten said. “That means you two will have to share.” He indicated Tomrin and Elisah. 
“I am not a very good horse man,” Tomrin admitted, sheepishly. The idea of sitting close to Elisah now even after carrying her embarrassed him. 
“It’s only until we find another horse,” Margretta said, letting go of the channel. “For now we need to get out of Menad. The place is going to be crawling with—trouble.” Tomrin could hear the brief stutter and was sure Elisah could hear it too. But here he dared not say a thing. Not in front of Margretta. Elisah deserved to know what she was getting into. But in truth he wasn’t sure himself. The day had turned into a nightmare, and it wasn’t over yet. 
Heading Out [?]
Marten helped Tomrin and Elisah up onto a gray razor called Misty. The riding coat he took back from Elisah as Margretta produced an overshirt for her. 
“You two will come after us. Stay Close,” Marten said.
The Orish man led his massive dun to the stable’s double doors and opened them and led out his charger. “Stay Gamble,” he said and then led out Queen’s Answer for Margretta. Then finally Misty. After which he disappeared back inside the stable door, closing it.
Margretta made a face but said nothing.
Finally he joined them from the side door. “Had to get the light.”
“Order, nothing out of place, look natural, “Margretta said to Tomrin and Elisah. “That’s how we stay alive. And yes, not talking to the fire Marshall.” 
“Is that what took you so long?” Marten asked. 
“He knew me—I had to stop.” 
“Then you did right,” Marten said.
Margretta grunted. “Let’s just go. We’ll all know if it was right, but later.”
Marten led the way. His massive dun was impossible to miss ahead of them or anyone watching. “So much for not looking conspicuous,” Tomrin said, turning his head to speak with Elisah. 
“Just watch where you’re going,” she said, not finding him funny, adding to the awkwardness. She had her arms around him and he could feel her pressed against him. He tried to ignore her but his body had responded. He seemed to lose attention even as he felt a stiffness in his neck. He snapped his head forward and made sure he followed closely on Margretta and her bay.
Her animal rushed ahead a dark gray splotch. 
They were just three shapes heading west. 
Then north, then west, then south. 
Marten was taking them on a circuitous route. 
Tomrin wondered if the man knew where he was going. If not he pretended he did. The streets he took were void of life and with quiet, empty shops lining them. The houses on the Maple were hidden by a line of shrubs. The man was avoiding the eyes of strangers. But there was an eerie feeling to the streets he chose. Maybe it was just paranoia, maybe Marten’s leaking into him.
Margretta must have felt it too. “What is it, Marten?” she called ahead. The man slowed his mount to a stop. Tomrin nudged Misty close to hear their words as they spoke. 
Marten was saying “….but it’s not a human, it’s an animal.” 
“Why would it be following us?” 
“I don’t know wild animals that well,” Marten shrugged. 
“What’s going on?” Tomrin asked. 
“It’s nothing,” Margretta said, “A dog maybe, probably hungry.” 
The look on Marten’s face did not say he believed it was just a dog, but he reined his dun about and led them on, continuing his random travel through the city of Menad, heading west by starts. Tomrin kept looking around for this wild dog supposedly shadowing them. He saw nothing, but maybe a pair of yellow eyes under a porch which disappeared as soon as he thought he saw them. 
Seeing things. It worried him. The night seemed unreal. He was leaving Menad. The glass shop was ruined. And these people he was with, he didn’t know and certainly couldn’t trust. He thought he could trust Elisah, but everytime he had her figured out, she changed. And Marten—Tomrin wanted to like the man, but now he was seeing things—wild animals in the shadows, or even a heaven hound. Or bloodbeasts. “Don’t even know where you’re going,” Tomrin muttered as they’d reached the western incline of the valley and started up.
What do you see? [?]
“What is it?” Elisah asked. 
 “What do you mean?” 
 “You’re breathing hard,” Elisah said. “Am I squeezing you too hard?” 
“No, It’s nothing,” Tomrin replied. “I never wanted to leave Menad.” 
“Me either,” Elisah squeezed him with her arms. “I can’t imagine. I’m sure it will be fine, now that we are going to see the Emperor.” 
Tomrin made a mollifying sound in his throat. “Yes, but, I don’t think that is where we are going.” 
“I keep forgetting you are not with them,” Elisah said. “Especially after what you said. And what you…are.” 
“I am a good person.” 
“But you killed your brother.” 
“And I’m sorry I did, but he made me do it.” 
“Made you?” Elisah shuddered. “But still, the temple.” She glanced off  to their left where it burned. Here and there were houses and they had come alive with people looking out over the valley towards the burning temple. The road here followed the curve of the valley and was lined with trees on both sides. Holding to the branches of one, a woman sobbed at the sight. A man, her husband most likely, held her. Fear gripped the man’s eyes. Talk of the Enfernii demons wasn’t just in whispers. Another man lamented that the gods had abandoned them. When people asked what they knew, Marten replied for all: “We know only as much as you, my friend.” 
Tomrin was relieved when they finally reached the level and the Menad valley was hidden by the trees. “You wanted to be a judge like your father?” Tomrin asked Elisah. 
“I was spending my free time in the Hall of victory.” 
“Never saw you there; but I stopped going.” 
“I think I can see the ambrosia now,” she said, suddenly distracted. “Faintly…”
At a break in the trees valley-side, Tomrin pulled Misty to a stop. This was the city which was his home. In the dark he could not see the glass shop nor resolve the Winged Helm Inn in the distance. 
Marten and Margretta returned to him. “Do you see it?” Marten said. 
“It?” asked Elisah. 
“The coyote?” Margretta said.
 “You saw a coyote?” Tomrin asked without looking away from them. 
 “It was large for one, but it wasn’t a wolf or a dog.” 
“It’s probably nothing,” Margretta added. 
“On the lower steppes there are stories of a coyote attacking large animals at night. Even horses and cows and oxen. A folk tale to frighten pilgrims,” Tomrin said. Here this Orish man wore one of their sacrificial knives and it made Tomrin wonder though Marten looked concerned...and maybe thoughtful. 
“Some tales have truth baked into them even if the facts are a jumble,” Margretta said. “But we stay here paralized by fear, or leave and hope we make it out alive.”
The Light in the Darkness [?]
“I don’t think anyone is afraid,” Marten said.
“I’m,” Tomrin said. “I’m afraid that the glass shop is totally ruined.” 
“Because of the contract?” Marten asked. 
“No,” Tomrin said. “I killed Rennly.” 
“Ah,” Marten said, raising his head slightly, and making a large looping, and knowing arc of a nod. “His will?” 
“Yes. He said he had it changed. Now the shop will be censored. It is Rennly attacking me from the grave. How did you know?” 
“Well, he wanted it done quickly, so he had done it cheaply.” 
“You?” 
“Yes,” Marten said with a grin to nearly rival Robles’ bests. “I wouldn’t worry.” 
“Why not?” Tomrin was in disbelief. “Tell me.” 
“Well, when you have something done cheaply, sometimes mistakes are made. I’m afraid its for his estate to never learn that certain aspects may not have been filed with the court at all and were instead sent to the burn bin.” 
“Freelancing again, Marten?” Margretta scolded.
Marten shrugged off her reproach. “You know me. Sometimes I make mistakes. That’s all.” 
“That still doesn’t fix the old money problem,” Tomrin said. 
“The three miserly men from Woolad?” 
Tomrin nodded, frowning. “They wanted Rennly and I to fight.” 
“I remember,” Marten said. “But now with you and Rennly gone what are they to think?”
“Exactly. Their money won’t come through. I feel like I’ve betrayed my friends at Godly Glassworks.” 
Marten pointed into the valley. “Look, the temple is on fire and it will have to be rebuilt. And you know what that means.” 
“It means more cut glass,” said Elisah brightly. 
“Yes, and who will be there to cut it? And dye it?” 
“Ahh,” Tomrin said, “But the contract?”
“When there is money to be made, men rarely stand on the forms,” Margretta said. 
“Trust in human greed. I’d almost be willing to bet my knife on it.” The weapon tricked into Marten’s hand. 
“Greed does seem eternal,” Margretta added.
“I don’t know,” Tomrin said, turning away from the flames of the temple. 
“I’m not saying trust men, just their greed,” Margretta said. “Now, let’s go.” Marten tricked home his knife then he and she reined their horses about. Tomrin stole one last glance at Menad before nudging Misty after them. 
“I can’t believe it,” Elisah said. 
“What?” Tomrin asked her. 
“After what you said—earlier, you are only worried about Menad and your glass shop.” 
“Is that so unbelievable? You saw that rock in Margretta’s hands. It was made of something like glass. We haven’t even begun to scratch the surface.” 
“It looked like a spell stone to me,” said Elisah. “What? You think you can make one?” 
“I’d like the chance to try. Who knows?” 
Tomrin contemplated as they rode on in silence. Glass and ambrosia, there seemed no limit to what he could achieve with a mastery of both. I’m well on my way. It was a pleasant thought. But he knew he had so much to learn. The last couple of days had taught him that. He breathed in the cool night air. It was free of smoke. The weight of worry about the glass shop lifted. 
“So ultimately, this fire is good for Menad,” Elisah said. “And your glass shop.” 
“I suppose,” Tomrin said. “But that of course all depends on how the gods take me burning down one of their temples.” 
“If you look straight ahead,” Elisah said to Tomrin. He took her drift to mean Marten and Magretta. “I wish I knew what was going on there,” she added. 
“Margretta and Marten have their own plans,” Tomrin said. “But at least there is hope for the glass shop. For now, that is good enough for me.”
Epilogue: How It Begins
	We hope to see more than just the stars through the trees.
		—From Notes, Digest One of the Society of Astronomers, 
  written by Head Astronomer Kurtus Jay. AtC 239

Headmaster Astronomer Pario pulled down his cap over his ears to cover them. The cap was one of his mothers. She knitted it when he was first elected to the College of Observers some forty years ago, and it helped some, yet the Altar’s observatory was always cold. Carved into a rock his gods called the Altar Mountain, the scopes were out and the platform in the cavernous observatory and stood open to the cold mountain air.
The rotating platform required power. It was a shame more of that heat could not be used to heat the platform. Women, Daughter of Heaven’s Glory, used their sunfire to provide the power. It was said life on Gearthrum was so much different than on Serathus, but this was the only home Pario knew.
He touched his cup of coffee on his desk. The ceramic cup was cold. He had drunk so little of it in the excitement of finding a new Daughter. The small temple in a small town on the edge of the wilderness had laid out the red carpet: New Daughter Here. 
Pario wanted a new cup of warm coffee, but his joints were beginning to feel stiffer by the day. Send Jemmen, he thought but dismissed the idea. He didn’t want anyone to know he was starting to wear down. He’d only been headmaster three years. His predecessor had lasted five. 
Head master Pario stood up and hugged his heavy purple robes around himself before picking up the mug of cold coffee. He heard the hiss of steam as one of his twenty junior astronomers shifted their scopes, scope five, Pario knew it by sound and location. 
Pario walked over to his Jemmen’s desk. They were the only two in the room who rode desks. Everyone else rode their respective scopes, each looking tiny up on their large brass tubes. “I’m going for more coffee, Jemmen,” Head master Astronomer Pario said. “You are in charge while I’m gone.” 
“A second cup?” his assistant asked. “This late?” You won’t sleep for your next shift.”
“I didn’t drink this one,” Pario replied. “The new Daughter sent coffee right out of my mind.” 
Down off the platform, Patio was certain Jemmen coveted his job as much as he had when he was Headmaster Astronomy Talvertey’s assistant. Probably hopes I will trip and fall off the ladder and break my neck. No one wasn’t supposed to have coffee up here, but there were perks to being the Headmaster. Certain rules were forgiven. Perhaps it was an incentive, or something more sinister? Holding the coffee left him only one hand for the rails. 
“Headmaster!” Tillus called out from scope five. “It’s Menad again. It looks like a fire.” 
“Fire?” 
“Yes, Headmaster. The whole temple seems to be on fire.” 
“That’s not possible!” The coffee cup nearly fell out of Pario’s hand. He was trembling, but not from the cold. 
“The Sisters of Mercy, Headmaster,” Jemmen called down to him. “It’s possible they—” 
Scope Five [?]
“Let me look!” Pario said.
He hurried up and over to his desk and set down his coffee before rushing over to scope five’s ladder and began climbing. “I can’t believe it. An attack? That hasn’t happened in years. No. An accident maybe?” 
“An attack fits the data,” Tillus said as Pario mounted the scope and placed his eye to the piece. His own heart pounded in his chest. The dial had read Menad! The giant moving platform for tracking the movements of earth never lied. Neither did the scopes. What Pario saw stole his breath away. 
The temple grounds were as they had seemed before, only now it was dark and they were lit with a huge fire burning, gutting the Temple. “Feathers,” he muttered. “Unholy feathers.” The temple wasn’t just one fire, it was gone, burnt completely up. Only the stones would remain. He pulled his eyes from the objective lens. His chest hurt. Pario wondered if this was how he died while riding a scope and a temple burning to the ground on Gearthrun.
“The data,” Pario said. “Is not ours to interpret.” But he couldn’t help shuddering. The job bringing the news down fell to him. He did not relish it. An attack. The gods and their Daughters would be incensed. Pario himself felt incensed, giving him, an old man, more work!
He trudged down the scope to the platform hoping he didn’t look like he was scurrying but he had been up and down too many times and seen others scurry too often to know he scurried. The temple in Menad was burning and he was scurrying down scope five for the second time this shift. If he didn’t know better he would say the scope had it in for his dignity. On the platform he straightened his robe and walked over to Jemmen. 
“I need to bring the news to the sacristy; you are in charge.” 
“So it is an attack?” 
“It is a fire. I know nothing more.” 
Jemmen raised his eyebrows at Pario, but nodded. “Yes, Headmaster.”
A Maze [?]
“Blooming flowers,” Pario half swore as he muttered to himself and headed for the ladder of the platform. If only he had gotten off the platform with his cup of coffee fast enough, then delivering this bad news would have fallen to Jemmen. Then he wouldn’t be so eager to replace me. But an attack did fit the data. 
A new Daughter had been found, then the temple where she was being held was burnt to the ground. Had Sisters of Mercy—what a cruel joke of a name—tried to capture the girl? It seemed possible. Pario had read the secret instructions first when he was made the assistant headmaster. It hadn’t told him much more than he and the astronomers suspected. Security was tight because Daughters were being kidnapped before they could be brought to Serathus and bound to the will of the Serath. 
Just last week the dark scope, the one used to monitor the Phoenix, revealed that the local star had been reborn. The last time that had happened had been just before the Leviathan had broken the Gaze Between the Worlds and tossed the Window into chaos. Coincidence maybe, yet Pario doubted these facts would be lost on the sacristy. 
“Please don’t let it be Seassarus still,” he prayed. Having to explain things to the red and black Serath was a trial, even the good news of the new Daughter had been met with skepticism and dismissed. The Golden Hearted was a cruel old bird for being one of the youngest. You are getting full of yourself, a voice in the head master’s head told him. Thinking ill of a god.
Muscles in his arms and legs vibrated nervously as he stepped off the ladder back to the solid earth the gods had named Serathus at the beginning of their dominion which he had learned started at the beginning of time. But Pario did not become the Headmaster Astronomer for the gods by accepting things so easily. Jemmen, Pario was certain had had similar thoughts even if they never talked of it. Such thoughts could be dangerous to speak aloud.
The halls outside the cavernous observatory were lit by alcove lamps. With the gradual slope the lighting slowly improved. The heart of the Altar Mountain hummed with the temple servants who worked and lived in the mountain and served the will of gods. The pinnacle of service was working the scopes in the observatory but at some point it seemed the servants had forgotten that. The lack of respect towards him and the other Astronomers was appalling. It was almost as if the gods and their cave dwelling helpers thought his job easy and didn’t take years upon years of study to master. 
Not a single person said hello as he headed for the sacristy; that was to be expected of the Serath and their Daughters, but not the maids and porters sweeping the halls and dusting the statue of the Serath in their marble alcoves. Or the lamp lightner and refuelers of the lamps and the hosts of cooks and launderers. Any idiot could do these jobs; only he could do his. And Jemmen.
Daughter Clooria stood guard at the door to the Holy Sacristy. Behind the large stone door bound with brass and on brass hinges, the gods prepared their Daughters for the binding. They would not be making that trip today. The Window between the worlds was closed. 
“You again, Pario.” 
“Yes, Daughter Clooria. Important news from Menad.” 
“Menad again? Haven’t you already brought the news from Menad? Going senile, Pario?” 
“It is Headmaster Astronomer Pario, Daughter Clooria. Fine minds like mine do not go senile.” 
“Then what is this other news from Menad, Headmaster Astronomer Pario?”
“I can’t say, not outside the sacristy. I’m afraid it is third-level secret, Daughter Clooria.”
“No it isn’t.”
“I shouldn’t even be telling you where my report is coming from, Daughter Clooria, now please see if they will admit me?” Pario took off his knitted blue hat and stared at the yellow moon and stars his mother had sewed into it.
The Sacristy [?]
“Wait here,” Daughter Clooria said testily and tapped on the door. It opened a crack and she slipped inside and the door closed. After several minutes it reopened and the woman stepped outside the sacristy. “They will see you.” She didn’t seem happy about it, but she showed him inside while she stayed without. 
The inside had not changed in the intervening hours. The lamps of burnished gold still lined the walls of gray worldwood paneling. The floor was worldwood and the carving on the walls were of the Serath and the World tree—not the one on Serathus. Pario had his own theory about that. 
Seasargus and one of his Daughters, Norina, stood waiting for him. The worldstone shined a bright golden light. The holy stone some claimed was the god of the gods. Others said it gave them eternal life. It was one of those mysteries Pario couldn’t himself quite penetrate. Anything could be the truth. Not too far from here the Heaven Hounds were kept, but he had never seen one. 
“Back again, Pario?” Seasargus’ Daughter, Norina said. “And with tales from Menad?” 
“Not tales, Daughter Norina,” Pario said, bowing before Seasargus. The god’s feathers were sharp looking and his large eyes had glossed over Pario as if he weren’t even there. His black claws were so deadly looking as any Sereth’s and Pario was just as happy not to have the High Lord’s attention. It was a good way of leaving the room dead. “I saw with my own eyes the unthinkable. The temple was burning.” 
“What part of the temple?”
“What part? The whole thing!”
“The Renegades,” Seasargus said, his feathers stirring. “They know the Phoenix Sun has been reborn? They are using it as a sign? Norina?” 
“How could they know, High Lord?” 
“How indeed, Norina?” Seasargus said, suddenly furious. “Tell me!”
“I’ll just let myself out,” Pario said quietly. 
“I don’t know,” Daughter Norina said as Pario closed the door escaping into the hallway. 
Pario heard Seasargus roar something that sounded like. “This is how it begins!” 
To Be Headmaster [?]
Then Daughter Norina screamed. 
Her loud scream cut short. Pario hurried down the hallway not even saying a word to daughter Clooria. Her wide eyes were on the door. Pario just wanted to get away. Old Norina was dead. 
Back in the Observatory, Pario climbed the platform and slumped into his chair. He stared into his hands, into the wrinkles. Jemmen walked over. 
“Nothing since you left, Headmaster. Scope five has continued it’s sweep.” 
Headmaster Astronomer Pario looked up. Concern lined Jemmen’s face. “You still want this job, Jemmen?” Pario asked softly. 
“What happened?” 
“Daughter Norina is dead.” 
“How did she die?” 
Pario slid his coffee mug across the desk towards Jemmen. “Get me hot cup and I’ll tell you.” Jemmen picked up the mug and Pario looked down at his desk. Unfinished reports and papers for the Society of Astronomers. Their work was legal on Serathus, but a deep current of heretical thought ran through the society. Members, members like himself, asked why was astronomy a taboo practice on Earth? Pario pushed his unfinished letter to the society under one of his unfinished reports. The Rebirth of the Phoenix Sun, an eyewitness account. It was for the Society. The letter was just a condensation of the account, a summary of just the juiciest bits. 
Jemmen returned with a steaming cup of coffee and set it down. He slid it forward and Pario picked it up and moved it closer to himself on the desk. “So what happened?” 
Pario told him everything, how he bypassed Clooria, how he found the sacristy, and how both Norina and Seasargus reacted to the news and to each other. And how he had run. And Clooria’s eyes. The fear. It was the same fear a servant might have for an angry Daughter. 
“And Seasargus, he said: ’This is how it begins?’” Jemmen asked. 
“He didn’t say it so much as shout it.” 
“What do you think it means?” 
“I don’t really know,” Pario replied. He had ideas but nothing that explained it. 
“A new Leviathan?” Jemmen asked, keeping his voice a whisper.
“A Leviathan from Menad?” Pario asked, “Seems preposterous, doesn’t it?” They had to look it up on the maps earlier. 
“But Seasargus didn’t think so?” 
“I suppose not,” said Pario. “But maybe his outburst was shock at one of the temples burning. I don’t think there is a single reference to a temple fire in the archives.” 
“I could find out,” Jemmen offered. 
“Do that,” Head master Astronomer Pario said. “I have a letter to write.” 
“And yes, Headmaster I would still like to be Headmaster one day.” 
“And when that day comes, Jemmen, I’m sure you’ll make a good one.” 
Jemmen padded off. 
“To My Family, Friends, and Colleagues” [?]
Pario pulled out a fresh sheet of paper, and addressed it to the Society of Astronomers. He wrote as the platform rotated with the movements of Seruthus and Gearthrun. The pages filled with words. Jemmen returned with a single sheet of paper in his hand. 
“Nothing, save for a reference in an Old High Orish book of apocrypha,” Jemmen said, handing over the sheet. On it, Old High Orish words were written using the standard characters. Under it was the translation. Jemmen explained, an archivist helped with it. The passage was in a precise hand. 
And so shall the Lamb set fire to the Swain,
And so shall the temple come down burning. 
As it was in the beginning, so shall it be in the end. 
“A book of apocrypha?”
“Yes, the archivist translated its name to something like: The Blind Crow.”
Pario put down the paper as he made a noise. “Uhahh!” He looked at Jemmen. 
“It’s nonsense,” he said, recovering his composure. “The Lamb and the Swain. That could mean anything.” 
“I know,” Jemmen replied. “I set the man to developing a more sophisticated translation. But I don’t need to tell you that the Leviathan was touched by the demons.” 
“A second coming of the demons,” Pario said. “Perhaps, that is what Seasargus meant.” 
“Perhaps,” Jemmen allowed. “I’ll let you get back to work.”
Pario’s pen scratched across the sheets like lightning filling them with his thoughts and remembered facts. He painted a picture with his words for those who could not spy the sun with their scopes. He wrote then reached the end, penning his conclusions and thanks. Then he retrieved the first sheet from the stack and turned it over to the front. All that was left was for him to title the letter. He wrote in the header. 
How It Begins [?]
The headmaster astronomer set down his pen, and reached for his coffee mug. He picked it up, but it was cold. He set it down, and realized he didn’t need coffee. He was warm and jittery from all the writing. He hadn’t written so much in one sitting before in his life. 
Jemmen came over and asked to read it. While he did, Pario watched his face as he reached certain points in the letter. When he finished, Pario asked, “What do you think?” 
“I’m not sure how the title fits in,” Jemmen said. “I mean, not without doing the same research we did.” 
“And only then if they fully appreciate the implications of the Phoenix’s rebirth,” Patio added.
“Ah, yes,” Jemmen said. “ I see. A hidden meaning. Clever.” 
“Is it?” Pario asked with a smile. “I thought it was just a catchy title.”

